VDSG VTB-OO1-13V AULT DWELLER’S
SURVIVAL GUIDERESTRICTED
ISSUED BY V AULT-TEC DOCUMENTATION
DEPARTMENT, JANUARY , 2077
NOTICE.––This document contains information affecting the
national defence of the United States within the meaning ofthe New Amended Espionage Act, 50 U.S.C., 31 and 32.  Itstransmission or the revelation of its contents in any mannerto an unauthorised person is prohibited by the law.
RESTRICTED

CONTENTSVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED Contents
General ................................................1—1
Important Vault Statistics ............1—1Nuclear Blast Effects ....................1—2Section I. Welcome to the Vault of the Future
Page Page
SimTek Operations ........................2—1Section II. Simulation (Tutorial)
General ..............................................3—1
Standard Personnel Records ....3—1Creating a New Personal
Record ..........................................3—3Derived Statistics..........................3—7
Complete Skill List ......................3—10Traits..................................................3—14Character Editor Options ........3—18Section III. Vault Personnel (Characters)
General ..............................................4—1Main Menu ........................................4—1Character Selection Screen......4—2Game View......................................4—3Interface Bar....................................4—3Inventory Bar vs. Cursors..........4—8Cursors ..............................................4—8Action Icons....................................4—10Inventory ........................................4—12Skilldex ............................................4—16Character Screen ........................4—17
RobCo PIPBoy 2000 ................4—20Automap ........................................4—24World Map ..................................4—24Terrain ............................................4—26Town Maps ..................................4—27Dialogue..........................................4—28Options ..........................................4—33Preferences ..................................4—35
Section IV. Instrumentation (Interface)
General ..............................................5—1Starting Combat ............................5—2Actions in Combat ........................5—2Chance to Hit ..................................5—4Ranged Weapons ........................5—6Hand to Hand Combat ................5—8Damage..............................................5—9
Armor................................................5—12Ending Combat..............................5—13Equipment ........................................5—14Experience ......................................5—21Perks ................................................5—23
Section V. Conflict Resolution (Combat)
(1) Hints & Tips ..............................A—1(2) Credits........................................A—4(3) Customer Support ................A—6(4) Warranty..................................A—7(5) World Wide Web Site ......A—8
(6) Survival Recipes ....................A—9(7) Quick Keys..............................A—10
Manual By: Chris Taylor Manual Design & Layout By: Ed Rubin
Manual Art By: Tramell Ray Isaac, Jason Anderson, Leonard Boyarsky,
and Scott RodenhizerSection VI. Appendices

1Section I. WELCOME TO 
THE VAULT OF THE FUTURE
VDSG VTB-001-13-1

GENERAL
Welcome to Vault-13, the latest in a series of public defence
works from Vault-Tec, your contractor of choice when it comes to thebest in nuclear shelters.  Vault-Tec, America’s Final Word in Homes.This document, VTB-001, the Vault Dwellers Survival Guide, is forthe events following a world-wide nuclear war.  In the case of a lim-ited scale nuclear war, or other world ending catastrophe, pleaserefer to the appropriate documentation (see also page 1—8):
End of World Cause Document # Title
Limited Scale VTB-002 Vault Dwellers Survival 
Nuclear War Guide (abridged version)
Disease VTD-001 Coping with Mr. Virus!
Starvation VTR-003 How to Eat Rat
Flooding VTF-100 Flotation Homes & Seaweed
Meteor VTM-020B How to Dodge Falling Rocks*
*Document not available at this time, will be available the 3rd quarter of 2078.
While we hope that peace will prevail and the need for such
from the ground up to provide the best chance for a good life follow-ing nuclear armageddon.  It is the duty of every American citizen tolearn and use the skills necessary for a comfortable Vault life.  Thebest place to start is with a dek and if you try to read this than you.
The Vault series of survival shelters are designed from the
ground up to provide the best chance for a good life following nucleararmageddon.  It is the duty of every American citizen to learn anduse the skills necessary for a comfortable Vault life.  The best placeto start is with a description of your new home.
IMPORTANT VAULT STATISTICS
Vault Number ............................13
Starting construction date ....August 2063
Ending construction date ......March 2069
Starting Budget ........................$400,000,000,000
Final Budget, with interest ..$645,000,000,000
Total number of occupants ....1,000 (at capacity)
Total duration ..........................10 years (at capacity)
Number of living quarters ......100 (hot bunking required if at 
maximum capacity)VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 1—11
Don’t let what could have happened bother you. We have
enough problems to deal with in the here and now.
- Overseer

Door thickness ..........................4 yards, steel
Earth coverage ..........................3,200,000 tons of soil, at 200 feet
Computer control system ......Think machine
Primary power supply ............Geo-thermal
Secondary power supply ........ General Atomics Nuclear Power 
backup systems
Power requirements ................3.98mkw/day
Stores ..........................................Complete construction equipment, 
hydro-agricultural farms, water purification from underground river, defensive weaponry to equip 10 men, communication, social and entertainment files (for total 
duration)
NUCLEAR BLAST EFFECTS
Vault-13 is designed to provide protection from the effects of a
nuclear blast.  To better understand the protection provided, we haveincluded a section from the High Energy Weapons FAQ that explainshow a nuclear blast causes damage.
The first thing bomb victims experience is the intense flux of pho-
tons from the blast, which releases 70-80% of the bomb's energy.  Theeffects go up to third degree thermal burns and are not a pretty sight.Initial deaths are due to this effect.
The next phenomenon is the supersonic blast front. You see it
before you hear it. The pressure front has the effect of blowing awayanything in its path. 
After the front comes the overpressure phase.  It would feel like
being underwater a few hundred meters.  (At a few thousand metersunder the sea, pressurised hulls implode.)  The pressure gradually diesoff, and there is a negative overpressure phase, with a reversed blastwind. This reversal is due to air rushing back to fill the void left by theexplosion.
The air gradually returns to normal atmospheric pressure.  At
this stage, fires caused by electrical destruction and ignited debris turnthe place into a firestorm.
Then come the middle term effects such as keloid formation and
retinal blastoma.  Genetic or hereditary damage can appear up toforty years after initial irradiation.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 1—2

ATMOSPHERIC EFFECTS OF BLASTS
The Mushroom Cloud.   The heat from fusion and fission
instantaneously raises the surrounding air to 10 million degrees C.This superheated air plasma gives off so much light that it looksbrighter than the sun, and is visible hundreds of kilometres (km)away.  The resultant fireball quickly expands. It is made up of hot air,and hence rises at a rate of a few hundred meters per second. After aminute or so, the fireball has risen to a few kilometres, and hascooled off to the extent that it no longer radiates.
The surrounding cooler air exerts some drag on this rising air,
which slows down the outer edges of the cloud. The unimpeded innerportion rises a bit quicker than the outer edges. A vacuum effectoccurs when the outer portion occupies the vacuum left by the high-er inner portion. The result is a smoke ring. 
The inner material gradually expands out into a mushroom
cloud, due to convection. If the explosion is on the ground, dirt andradioactive debris get sucked up the stem, which sits below the fire-ball.
Collisions and
ionisation of the cloudparticles result inlightning bolts flicker-ing to the ground. 
Initially, the cloud
is orange-red due to achemical reactionwhen the air is heated.When the cloud coolsto air temperature, thewater vapour starts tocondense. The cloudturns from red towhite.
In the final
stages, the cloud canget about 100kmacross and 40kmhigh, for a megatonclass explosion.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 1—3
If you see the flash, duck and cover!1

Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP).   A nuclear explosion gives off
radiation at all wavelengths of light. Some is in the radio/radar por-tion of the spectrum - the EMP effect. The EMP effect increases thehigher you go into the atmosphere. High altitude explosions canknock out electronics by inducing a current surge in closed circuitmetallic objects - electronics, power lines, phone lines, TVs, radios,
etc. The damage range can be over 1000km.
OVERVIEW OF IMMEDIATE EFFECTS
The three categories of immediate effects are: blast, thermal
radiation (heat), and prompt ionising or nuclear radiation. Their rel-ative importance varies with the yield of the bomb. At low yields, allthree can be significant sources of injury. With an explosive yield ofabout 2.5 kilotons (kT), the three effects are roughly equal. All arecapable of inflicting fatal injuries at a range of 1km. 
The fraction of a bomb's yield emitted as thermal radiation,
blast, and ionising radiation is essentially constant for all yields, butthe way the different forms of energy interact with air and targetvary dramatically. 
Air is essentially transparent to thermal radiation. The thermal
radiation affects exposed surfaces, producing damage by rapid heat-ing.  A bomb that is 100 times larger can produce equal thermal radi-ation intensities over areas 100 times larger. The area of an (imagi-nary) sphere centred on the explosion increases with the square ofthe radius. Thus the destructive radius increases with the squareroot of the yield (this is the familiar inverse square law of electro-magnetic radiation). Actually the rate of increase is somewhat less,partly due to the fact that larger bombs emit heat more slowly whichreduces the damage produced by each calorie of heat. It is importantto note that the area subjected to damage by thermal radiationincreases almost linearly with yield. 
Blast effect is a volume effect. The blast wave deposits energy in
the material it passes through, including air. When the blast wavepasses through solid material, the energy left behind causes damage.When it passes through air it simply grows weaker. The more matterthe energy travels through, the smaller the effect. The amount ofmatter increases with the volume of the imaginary sphere centred onthe explosion. Blast effects thus scale with the inverse cube lawwhich relates radius to volume. 
The intensity of nuclear radiation decreases with the inverse
square law like thermal radiation. However nuclear radiation is alsoVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 1—4

strongly absorbed by the air it travels through, which causes the
intensity to drop off much more rapidly. 
These scaling laws show that the effects of thermal radiation
grow rapidly with yield (relative to blast), while those of radiationrapidly decline. 
In a small nuclear attack (bomb yield approx. 15kT) casualties
(including fatalities) would be seen from all three causes. Burns(including those caused by an ensuing fire storm) would be the mostprevalent serious injury (two thirds of those who would die the firstday would be burn victims), and occur at the greatest range. Blastand burn injuries would be found in 60-70% of all survivors. Peopleclose enough to suffer significant radiation illness would be wellinside the lethal effects radius for blast and flash burns, as a resultonly 30% of injured survivors would show radiation illness. Many ofthose people would be sheltered from burns and blast and thusescape the main effects.  Even so, most victims with radiation illnesswould also have blast injuries or burns as well. 
With yields in the range of hundreds of kilotons or greater (typ-
ical for strategic warheads) immediate radiation injury becomesinsignificant. Dangerous radiation levels only exist so close to theexplosion that surviving the blast is impossible. On the other hand,fatal burns can be inflicted well beyond the range of substantial blastdamage. A 20 megaton bomb can cause potentially fatal third degreeburns at a range of 40km, where the blast can do little more thanbreak windows and cause superficial cuts. 
A convenient rule of thumb for estimating the short-term fatali-
ties from all causes due to a nuclear attack is to count everyone insidethe 5 psi blast overpressure contour around the hypocenter as a fatal-ity. In reality, substantial numbers of people inside the contour willsurvive and substantial numbers outside the contour will die, but theassumption is that these two groups will be roughly equal in size andbalance out. This completely ignores any possible fallout effects. 
OVERVIEW OF DELAYED EFFECTS
Radioactive Contamination.   The chief delayed effect is
the creation of huge amounts of radioactive material with longlifetimes (half-lifes ranging from days to millennia). The primarysource of these products is the debris left from fission reactions. Apotentially significant secondary source is neutron capture bynon-radioactive isotopes both within the bomb and in the outsideenvironment. VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 1—51

When atoms fission they can split in some 40 different ways, pro-
ducing a mix of about 80 different isotopes. These isotopes varywidely in stability; some are completely stable while others under-go radioactive decay with half-lifes of fractions of a second. Thedecaying isotopes may themselves form stable or unstable daugh-ter isotopes. The mixture thus quickly becomes even more com-plex, some 300 different isotopes of 36 elements have been identi-fied in fission products. 
Short-lived isotopes release their decay energy rapidly, creating
intense radiation fields that also decline quickly. Long-lived isotopesrelease energy over long periods of time, creating radiation that ismuch less intense but more persistent. Fission products thus ini-tially have a very high level of radiation that declines quickly, but asthe intensity of radiation drops, so does the rate of  decline. 
A useful rule-of-thumb is the "rule of sevens". This rule
states that for every seven-fold increase in time following a fissiondetonation (starting at or after 1 hour), the radiation intensitydecreases by a factor of 10. Thus after 7 hours, the residual fissionradioactivity declines 90%, to one-tenth its level of 1 hour. After7*7 hours (49 hours, approx. 2 days), the level drops again by90%. After 7*2 days (2 weeks) it drops a further 90%; and so onfor 14 weeks. The rule is accurate to 25% for the first two weeks,and is accurate to a factor of two for the first six months. After 6months, the rate of decline becomes much more rapid. The rule ofsevens corresponds to an approximate t^-1.2 scaling relationship. 
These radioactive products are most hazardous when they
settle to the ground as "fallout". The rate at which fallout settlesdepends very strongly on the altitude at which the explosionoccurs, and to a lesser extent on the size of the explosion. 
If the explosion is a true air-burst (the fireball does not touch
the ground), when the vaporized radioactive products cool enoughto condense and solidify, they will do so to form microscopic parti-cles. These particles are mostly lifted high into the atmosphere bythe rising fireball, although significant amounts are deposited inthe lower atmosphere by mixing that occurs due to convective cir-culation within the fireball. The larger the explosion, the higherand faster the fallout is lofted, and the smaller the proportion thatis deposited in the lower atmosphere. For explosions with yieldsof 100kT or less, the fireball does not rise above the troposphereVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 1—6

where precipitation occurs. All of this fallout will thus be brought
to the ground by weather processes within months at most (usu-ally much faster). In the megaton range, the fireball rises so highthat it enters the stratosphere. The stratosphere is dry, and noweather processes exist there to bring fallout down quickly. Smallfallout particles will descend over a period of months or years.Such long-delayed fallout has lost most of its hazard by the timeit comes down, and will be distributed on a global scale. As yieldsincrease above 100kT, progressively more and more of the totalfallout is injected into the stratosphere. 
An explosion closer to the ground (close enough for the fire-
ball to touch) sucks large amounts of dirt into the fireball. Thedirt usually does not vaporize, and if it does, there is so much ofit that it forms large particles. The radioactive isotopes aredeposited on soil particles, which can fall quickly to earth. Falloutis deposited over a time span of minutes to days, creating down-wind contamination both nearby and thousands of kilometresaway. The most intense radiation is created by nearby fallout,because it is more densely deposited, and because short-lived iso-topes haven't decayed yet. Weather conditions can affect this con-siderably of course. In particular, rainfall can "rain out" fallout tocreate very intense localised concentrations. Both external expo-sure to penetrating radiation, and internal exposure (ingestion ofradioactive material) pose serious health risks. 
Explosions close to the ground that do not touch it can still
generate substantial hazards immediately below the burst pointby neutron-activation. Neutrons absorbed by the soil can generateconsiderable radiation for several hours. 
The megaton class weapons have been largely retired, being
replaced with much smaller yield warheads. The yield of a modernstrategic warhead is, with few exceptions, now typically in therange of 200-750 kT. Recent work with sophisticated climate mod-els has shown that this reduction in yield results in a much largerproportion of the fallout being deposited in the lower atmosphere,and a much faster and more intense deposition of fallout than hadbeen assumed in studies made during the sixties and seventies.The reduction in aggregate strategic arsenal yield that occurredwhen high yield weapons were retired in favour of more numerouslower yield weapons has actually increased the fallout risk.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 1—71

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 1—8
ADDITIONAL PUBLICATIONS
Flotation Homes and Seaweed
A complete survival guide for the oceanbound.  More tips, instructions, and plansthan you could possibly ever use.Coping With Mr. Virus!
An extended pamphlet for the wholefamily!  Includes the popular How-To-Burn-Diseased-Bodies section.VDSG (abridged version)
A condensed version of the VDSG,containing just the important informationyou need!VDSG
ISSUED BY VAULT-TEC 
DOCUMENTATION DEPARTMENT
Effective Date     March, 2077For Survivors of a Limited
Scale Nuclear War
First PrintingVTB-OO2-13V AULT DWELLER’S
SURVIVAL GUIDE
ABRIDGED VERSION
How to Eat Rat
Over 101 recipes, from basic meals to acomplete set of dishes, all the way fromsnacks to desserts!HOW TO
EAT RAT
Second EditionNEW FOR ‘77: 
15 five-minute Recipes and
the tasty Rodent a la King!
VTR-OO3VTD-OO1
Coping
With Mr. Virus!
Fifteenth Edition - December 2076Featuring the latest Super Ebola
Quarantine Techniques!WARNING;
All references to the government sanc-
tioned and controlled FEV virus are notallowed in this publication.  
FLOTATION
HOMES &SEAWEEDDROWNED- 
A PERMANENTSTATE OF BEING?
WE FIELD-TEST
THE LATESTWATERPROOF SPF 900SUNSCREENS
PLANT A GARDEN
YOU CAN COMEBACK TO!
WATERBEDS- 
A PRACTICALALTERNATIVE
COPING WITH
YOUR NEWMOBILE HOMEVTF-100
A Vault-Tec publicationSpecial Vault Dwellers Issue - July 2076
Houseboat 
Cruise Control!
Coming Soon!HOW TO DODGE
FALLING ROCKS
Available the 
3rd quarter of
2078
VTM-O20B

Section II.
SIMULATION
VDSG VTB-001-13-22

SIMTEK OPERATIONS
The Vault-Tec Research Group has determined that after a
long period of security, many Vault-Dwellers will feel “uncomfort-able” with the idea of returning to the outside world.  The SimTek5000 will provide a safe and reassuring return to life on the out-side world.  This chapter will give you a brief walk-through of theoperation of the SimTek 5000.
Experienced Vault Dwellers may want to start with
Character Creation, and skip this tutorial chapter.  For beginningVault Dwellers, this tutorial will prepare you for the outside world.
After starting the Fallout process on your terminal, click on
the NEW GAME button from the Main Menu.
The character selection screen will appear.  For now, keep the
personnel record of Max Stone displayed and select TAKE.  Thiswill choose Max as your character.  In the future, you may want toselect another character, or even create your own character.
The simulation will now start.  After a briefing by the Vault
Overseer as to your immediate task, you will appear outside theVault Blast Door.
Your first action should be to equip yourself with armament.
All Vault-Tec prepared Vaults come with the latest in offensive anddefensive equipment.  You will be supplied with the most lethalself-protective devices available.
Click the INV button on the interface bar at the bottom of the
screen.  The hand cursor allows you to move items around in yourVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 2—12
Figure 2-1: 
Starting out,right outside theVault Door.  Clickthe INV button toopen yourinventory andequip yourself.

inventory.  Click and drag the pistol to the ITEM 1 slot.  Release
the mouse button.  You are now armed!  Move the brass knucklesto the ITEM 2 slot.  Click on the DONE button.  You will return tothe main game view.
The hex cursor is a movement cursor.  Move it to where you
want to walk, and left-click to start walking there.  For now, moveyour mouse until the movement cursor is adjacent to the comput-er next to the door.  Left-click once to walk there.  As you are walk-ing, you can move the movement cursor to another location.  If youwant to interrupt your current walk, simply left-click again.
Once you are stand-
ing next to the computer,right-click once.  This willchange the cursor fromthe movement cursor tothe command cursor.  Thecommand cursor is howyou interact with items/objects in the environment and other peo-ple.  Right-click once on the computer.  This will make your char-acter “use” the computer.  Now look at the display window in thelower left-hand corner of the screen.  Try using the computer again.
Left-click on your character a couple of times.  Notice that it
rotates you around.  Your facing generally does not matter, as yourcharacter will turn to face whatever direction is important whenneeded.  For now, right-click again to change the cursor back to themovement cursor.  Walk to the right side of the large vault door.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 2—2
Figure 2-2: The Movement, Command
and Targeting cursors respectively.
Figure 2-3: 
Using the Vaultdoor computer.

Now change to the command cursor.  Left-click on the computer.  If
you are standing too far away from an object, you will automati-cally walk or run there when you attempt to use the object.
Walk south, moving further into the cave.  Watch out for
vermin!
If you move too close to a rat, it will decide to attack you.
After it moves up to you and bites, combat will start.  Notice thatthe combat buttons in the lower right-hand corner of the interfacebar open up.  It’s now combat!  Left-click on the pistol.  The cursorwill change to a target and the rat will be outlined in red.  Movethe target cursor over the rat.  The number next to the cursor ishow likely you are to hit it.  It should be a pretty big number.  Left-click the mouse button to shoot the rat.  The closer you are to yourtarget, the easier it is to hit them with a ranged weapon.
If you miss it, or it takes the bullet but doesn’t die, click on the
big red button that is attached to the button with the pistol.  Itshould change the active item from the pistol to the brass knuck-les.  Left-click on the brass knuckles to attack with them.  Targetthe rat again.  You can continue to attack until you run out ofaction points.  The number of action points you have remaining isdisplayed by the row of green lights above your weapon.  The costto use a weapon is displayed in the lower left-hand side of theweapon button.  When you have just a few action points remain-ing, end your turn by clicking on the END TURN button.Everyone else involved in the combat will get a chance to act, andthen it will be your turn again.  When your turn starts, your actionpoints are restored.
If the rat dies, combat will end.  If the rat lives after your
attacks, it will get another chance to attack you.  You know it is therats turn when the lights on the interface bar turn from green tored.  Don’t worry, you’ll get a turn soon enough.  If the rat starts toVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 2—32
Figure 2-4: The combat button.  The END TURN
button will end your current turn.  The END CMBTbutton will attempt to stop the combat.  If there arehostile creatures still involved, the fight will continue!


run away, you can end combat by clicking on the END COMBAT
button.
Once the rat is dead, continue south through the caverns.
Hold down the shift key and click on a hex to run instead of walk-ing.
If you encounter rats, use a variety of weapons to attack
them.  You will notice that some weapons are easier or better touse.  Due to the darkness of the caves, it is difficult to hit creaturesat a distance.  To increase the amount of light, and make it easierto see the rats, you might want to use one of your flares.  Openinventory, right-click to change from the hand cursor to the inven-tory command cursor.  Left-click and hold on the flare.  A list ofoptions will appear.  From the top, the list of icons are: Examine,Use, Drop and Cancel.  Move the mouse down to the Use actionicon.  Release the mouse button.  The flare has now been activat-ed.  To keep it separate from the un-activated flare, it is moved tothe bottom of your inventory list.  Scroll down to the bottom of thelist.  Left-click and hold on the activated flare.  Select the dropaction icon.  The lit flare will be dropped to the ground.  Anyattacks within the zone of light are easier than in the pure dark-ness of the cave.  Experiment.
You might get hurt.  If so, you need to heal yourself.  Open
your inventory and use a Stimpak.  Stimpaks will heal your cur-rent hit points, but never over your maximum hit points.Another method of healing is to rest.  Press Z on the keyboard.This will display the PIPBoy clock.  Click on the Until Healedline in the display.  You will spend time resting until all of yourhit points are restored.  Another way to access the clock is to clickon the PIP button on the interface, and then click on the alarmclock icon in the upper left-hand corner of the PIPBoy.  There areusually a couple of different ways of performing the major func-tions in the game.
When you get into another combat, select the pistol.  Right-
click once on the button.  This will display the targeted attack sym-bol in the lower right-hand corner of the weapon button.  Whenyou make attacks now, you will make a targeted attack.  This willlet you attack specific locations on your target.  Clicking on a tar-get with the target cursor will display a new window.  Select thelocation you want to attack by clicking on the name of the location.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 2—4

Some areas of a rat are harder to hit.  However, the chance of you
doing more damage or some other effect is increased by making atargeted attack.
When you are tired of killing rats, you can try Sneaking past
them.  A good sneak will let you avoid the rats.  Press the Skilldexbutton on the interface bar.  Click on the Sneak skill.  You will seeSneak printed just above the interface bar.  As long as your areSneaking, the rats will have a more difficult time of seeing you.  Ifthe rat does see you, they will start combat as usual.  There is nocombat penalty for trying to Sneak and getting caught at it.
Do not run.  If you run, you cannot Sneak anymore.  Sneak
carefully around the rats.
There are other skills on the Skilldex that can be used.  The
First Aid and Doctor skills allow you to heal yourself and othercharacters in the game.  All the skills except Sneak require that yougive a target to use the skill on.  If you are hurt, open the Skilldexand select First Aid.  The targeting cursor will turn yellow.  Clickon your character.  Depending on how good of a medic you are (thebetter your First Aid skill, the better you are at performing thatskill), you will heal some hit point damage or do nothing.
When you have explored enough of these caverns, go to the
south and then to the west.  The Automap, which can be accessedby clicking the MAP button or pressing the TAB key, will showyour location in the caves.  You are looking for a long tunnel in thesouthwest corner of the caverns.
When you reach the edge of the tunnel, you will see naturalVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 2—5
Figure 2-5: The Skilldex bar.2

light.  Walk into the light.  This will take you to the world map.
The world map is how you get around the vast outdoors.  Click onthe Vault-15 button on the right-hand side of the screen.  This willstart walking you to your first destination.  
The world is dark to start.  As you explore, areas will be
revealed.  A green circle on the world map denotes an importantarea.  Vault-13 has a green circle since it is so important.  Youshould stop and explore any other important areas that you comeacross.  Be careful exploring.  If you spend too much time lookingfor new areas, you could find that the Vault has run out of water.Since your mission is to save the Vault from this terrible end, youshould do everything you can do to avoid it.
Good luck!VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 2—6
Figure 2-6:
Exiting theVault caverns.The patch ofdarkness in thelight is the “exitgrid”.  Walk intothe exit grid toleave the map.

Section III.
VAULT PERSONNEL
VDSG VTB-001-13-33

GENERAL
The key to a successful reintroduction of civilization follow-
ing a massive scale nuclear war is people.  Here at Vault-Tec, weare working to ensure that your fellow man (and woman) is up tothe task of bringing America back from the dead.
Characters are people in the game world.  A player character
represents you in the game world.  We will sometimes refer to aplayer character as personnel.  The terms personnel and playercharacter are interchangeable.  Other types of characters arecalled non-player characters (NPCs), so that you won’t confusethem with you.  NPCs can be other vault dwellers, people from theoutside world, or even mutants.
STANDARD PERSONNEL RECORDS
Fallout comes equipped with three pre-made characters, for
your use and enjoyment.  These personnel are prepared for mostconditions in the outside world.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—1MAX
"Stone" to his friends, Maxwell
is the largest person currentlyliving in the Vault. He is knownfor  his physical strength andstamina.  He would make theideal volunteer due to histremendous  size and strength.It is unfortunate that hisintelligence was affected afterbirth when the labour botdropped him on his head. Hedoesn't care that he might haveto leave the Vault.Figure 3-1: Max Stone 
VID 208-197-88-1253

We appreciate the fact that you are reading the Vault Dwellers
Survival Guide, but would prefer that you use the Fallout interface,so we have implemented a special way of viewing these personnel:
From the character selection screen, select MODIFY.  You
can now examine these characters in detail, actually changingtheir statistics.  But more importantly, you can view every item intheir personnel record using the enclosed information card in thelower right-hand corner.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—2NATALIA
Natalia is the grand-child of a
Russian diplomat who workedat the Soviet Consulate in LosAngeles. She is a talentedacrobat, with excellentcoordination and reflexes. Sheis extremely intelligent andresourceful. Her only difficultyas a young child wasunderstanding personal propertylaws. Natalia is very interestedin leaving the Vault, and curiousto explore the outside world.Figure 3-2: Natalia
Dubrovhsky VID 208-206-49-229
ALBERT
Albert is a charismatic leader
of a small, vocal minority of theVault population that isconsidering life on the outsideworld.  Dedicated to the role ofa negotiator, he is often able tocommunicate efficientlybetween different parties. Hisprofessed occupation is closestto what  was once known as a"lawyer."  Albert is often ableto convince others that his ideasare correct.Figure 3-3: Albert Cole 
VID 208-206-49-227

CREATING A NEW PERSONNEL RECORD
For maximum enjoyment, a character creation system has
been implemented. This will allow you to make a character ofyour own choice.  The following instructions will guide youthrough the character creation process.
Your character is a representative of you in the game world.  
Your character will follow your commands, and perform actions asyou require.  It is up to you to make the character that best suitsyou and suits your style of play.  Fortunately, with the FalloutSurvival Kit, your happiness is assured.  Vault-Tec guarantees it!
1
We will often refer to you and your character as the same
person.  That is the beauty of a role-playing game - you are yourcharacter.  Your actions as the player will control the actions andconsequences of the little character on the screen.  Obviously, wedon’t condone some of the actions performed in the game world asappropriate, or even legal, actions in the real world.  Don’t confusethe two.
Characters are defined by various statistics and skills.
During the character creation stage, you will adjust the primarystatistics, and in turn, the statistics will determine your skills.
If you want to see what a particular statistic or skill does,
click on the item name with your mouse pointer, and the card inthe lower right-hand corner of the screen will display the perti-nent information.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—3
Figure 3-4: 
The charactercreation screen.
1Guarantee not available in all states, or after any of the following: flooding, drought,
famine, nuclear war, or other acts of God.3

To make your own character, do the following:
(1)Spend Character Points
on Statistics (see page 3—5)
(2)  Select three Tag Skills
(see page 3—10)
(3)Choose up to two Traits
(see page 3—14)
(4)Select your Age 
(see page 3—17)
(5)Select your Sex 
(see page 3—17)
(6)Name your character
(see page 3—17)
(7)Optional : If necessary,
select any Options (see page 3—18)
(8)Congratulations! Your
character is finished;press DONE to continue!VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—4
Figure 3-5: The
information on thiscard will helpanswer anyquestions you mayhave.  It’s animportant resourcethat you shouldpay attention to.
Always test the air for
radiologicals and viruses.A containment suit is yourbest friend!

STEP #1: SPEND CHARACTER POINTS ON STATISTICS
All characters have seven primary statistics:
Strength. Raw physical strength.  The ability to lift weights,
have stronger punches, carry more equipment and use largerweapons.  Stronger characters will be able to lug around more items,do more damage in combat and so on.  If you want to play a big, phys-ical character, choose a high Strength.
Perception. The ability to notice things.  A combination of
your senses, including touch, sight, taste, smell and hearing.Perception affects your ranged weapon distances, small details thatyou have a chance to notice and other sense related tasks.  Perceptivecharacters will get more information about the world.  If want to playa character that can shoot guns at targets really far away, buy upyour Perception.
Endurance. The ability to withstand punishment and physi-
cal exertion.  A high Endurance will let you survive and carry onwhere other, weaker people would have to stop.  It affects your hitpoints, and your resistances.  A character with a high Endurance willbe able to fight longer, and be less likely to die in combat.
Charisma. A combination of looks and charm.  The higher
your Charisma, the better you are able to communicate with otherpeople.  Highly Charismatic characters are more likely to be able toget their way without resorting to violence, and to be able to get bet-ter deals in trading.  Characters who like to talk to people should buyup their Charisma.
Intelligence.   Your mental strength and abilities.  The higher
your Intelligence, the more skills you will excel in, and the moreoptions you will have in dialogue.  A high Intelligence is important toany character.  Characters who want lots of choices in dialogueshould pick a higher Intelligence statistic.
Agility.   Your speed and dexterity.  Physical manipulation abil-
ity.  Your Agility will affect many skills requiring fine coordination.  Itwill also adjust many combat related statistics.  Agility is importantto any type of character.  Combat and thief characters should have ahigher Agility than diplomatic or scientific characters.
Luck.   Luck is the odd statistic.  It is a combination of fate,
karma and, in general, how the universe views you.  Luck will mod-ify many things…  All characters will benefit from a high Luck, andwill suffer a little more with a lower Luck.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—53

All primary statistics have a value.  The values range from one,
the lowest, to ten, the highest, and five is average.  All charactersstart with average values in all statistics.  Fortunately, you get fivecharacter points to spend on your statistics to improve them.  You canspend one character point on any five statistics, put all characterpoints into one statistic, or any combination you wish.
Progressive trailers mostly noisily perused umpteen botulisms. One
chrysanthemum extremely annoyingly marries quixotic Klingons.Five putrid Macintoshes gossips, because two televisions grew up.One irascible sheep easily sacrificed five Klingons, and the trailersperused Tokyo. Poisons grew up.
Five televisions gossips. Umpteen partly putrid elephants
tastes one almost silly sheep, because chrysanthemums abused five 
very quixotic botulisms, and Quark incinerated two tickets, even
though one orifice partly lamely towed pawnbrokers, yet Santa Clausyou can move many llamas into arranging all of the primary statistics. 
If you want more character points, you can reduce a statistic
below five, gaining one character point for every point you lower thestatistic.  No statistic can drop below one.  You can lower any statis-tic, or combination of statistics.  Your friends at Vault-Tec do not sug-gest lowering any statistic below four, but the option is there for you.If you lower your Intelligence below four, for example, your dialoguewill be severely restricted (see page 4—29).
You must, however, spend all of your character points before you
complete your character.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—6
Figure 3-6: 
The location ofthe primarystatistics on thecharacterscreen.
To help you gauge the value of a statistic, we devised a
simple system of naming each value.  Here is the list,from worst to best:
1) Very Bad
2) Bad3) Poor4) Fair5) Average6) Good
7) Very Good8) Great9) Excellent10) Heroic
Hope that helps!  -Overseer

When you change your primary statistics, notice that your
derived statistics and skills change.  The derived statistics and skillsare based, in part, on the values of the primary statistics.  You cannotadjust them directly (see Tag Skills, page 3—10).  If you want more HitPoints, you will have to spend more character points on Endurance.
Your statistics define you.  If you have a high Strength, high
Agility, low Intelligence and low Charisma, you are most likely notgoing to impress someone with your savior-faire at a dance, but thattable you’re about to drop on their head will get their attention.
Your statistics will, generally, not improve directly through
experience or game play.  You should plan on seeing the same statis-tics throughout the course of your adventures, and plan accordingly.
Derived Statistics
In order to make the best possible decision regarding your char-
acter choice, we have developed an easy to use method of determin-ing your derived statistics.  We call this method, the “look-it-up-below” method.  And we think it works pretty darn well.
Hit Points. Your hit points determine how much damage you
can take before you succumb to the long dirt nap.  The more hitpoints you have, the longer you can survive outside.  The less hitpoints you have, the more healing you will need to do.  The numberof hit points you have will grow when your character earns experi-ence and advances in levels.  The number of hit points are displayedas current/maximum.  If you ever get to 1/30 hit points, for example,you need some serious medical attention.  And soon, brother.
Starting hit points are equal to 15 + (2 x Endurance) + Strength.
Average characters will have 30 hit points.
Armor Class. Your natural armor class is how good you are at
avoiding being hit in combat.  The higher your armor class statistic,the worse your opponent’s to hit number.  Your natural armor classmay be augmented and improved by wearing armor.  See Armor(page 5—12) and the sample armors in the Equipment List (page5—15) for more information about armor and armor class. 
Starting armor class is equal to your Agility.  Average char-
acters will have an armor class of 5.
Action Points. The number of action points your character has
will determine how many different actions you can take during a com-bat turn.  Every action will have a different action point cost, which issubtracted from your total action points.  When you run out of actionVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—73

points, you cannot perform another maneuver until the next combat turn.
Action points are only used during combat.  Action points are not cumulative,but instead roll into armor class on a 1 for 1 basis.  If you have 4 action pointsremaining when you end your combat turn, you will get a +4 bonus to yourarmor class until the start of your next turn.  See Actions in Combat (page 5—2) for more details on action points.
Initial Level. Starting action points are equal to HAgility + 5.
Average characters will have 7 action points.
Carry Weight. The total amount of equipment that you can
lug around the post-nuclear world is represented by your carryweight.  The higher your carry weight the more equipment you cancarry.  You can carry a total amount of equipment in pounds equal toyour carry weight, and no more.
Initial Level. Starting carry weight is equal to 25 lbs. + (your
Strength x 25 lbs.).  Average characters will have 150 lbs.
Melee Damage. Your melee damage is the amount of bonus,
or extra, damage you do with unarmed and hand-to-hand weapondamage in combat.  Using your fists, a knife, or a sledgehammer, incombat would do the basic amount of damage for those weapons plusyour melee damage.  If you want to do more melee damage, take ahigher Strength.
Initial Level. Starting melee damage is equal to Strength - 5,
with a minimum of 1 point.  Average characters will have a meleedamage of 1.
Damage Resistance. The ability to shrug off some amount of
damage in combat is attributed to your damage resistance derivedstat.  This statistic is a percentage, meaning that it will subtract anamount of damage from every blow based on a percentage of the dam-age.  If your damage resistance is 10%, and you take 20 points ofdamage from a single attack, you will end up taking 18 points of dam-age after your damage resistance.  You will need to equip armor tosee your damage resistance increase.
Initial Level. Starting damage resistance is equal to 0%.
Poison Resistance. Getting poisoned is an unfortunate pos-
sibility that must be taken into account.  Fortunately, most peoplehave a hardy poison resistance compared to the small animals thatare the usual prey for most poisonous snakes.  Poison resistance is apercentage that will reduce the amount of poison damage you take.
Initial Level. Starting poison resistance is equal to Endurance
x 5.  Average characters will have 25% poison resistance.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—8

Radiation Resistance. Radiation is something that any
vault-dweller must be concerned with.  While it is normal for a smallamount of roentgens, or rads, to enter the normal person during thenormal year of activity (more if activities include mountain expedi-tions and/or high altitude ballooning), a large amount of rad poison-
ing is a reason for concern.  The average person receives about Hto
1 rad a year.  After a nuclear fallout, you would expect more.  See
Damage (page 5—12) for more information.  With any exposure toradiation, your radiation resistance will reduce the total amount ofrads you take by it’s percentage.  It is very similar to damage or poi-son resistance.
Initial Level.   Starting radiation resistance is equal to your
Endurance x 2.  Average characters will have a 10% radiation resis-tance.
Sequence.   This statistic will help determine who will go first
in combat, and in which order people and critters will get to act.  SeeCombat (page 5—2) for more information.  The higher the sequencevalue, the more likely you will act before your opponent.
Initial Level. Starting sequence is equal to your Perception x 2.
Average characters will have a 10 sequence.
Healing Rate. People do not heal wounds at the same rate
over the same amount of time.  Your healing rate will tell you howfast you can bounce back from that near-fatal encounter, and contin-ue with your important work of holding off the end of the world.  Ifyou have taken damage, you will get a number of hit points back atthe end of each day equal to your healing rate.  If you rest, you willget a number of hit points back every six hours equal to your healingrate.  In no case, can you get more current hit points than your max-imum number of hit points.
Initial Level. Starting healing rate is equal to NEndurance,
with a minimum of 1.  Average characters will have a healing rate of 1.
Critical Chance. Critical hits in combat are special attacks
that cause extra damage or some special effect.  The chance to causea critical hit is partially based on this stat.  The higher your criticalchance, the more likely you are to cause one of these powerful hits.It is expressed in a percentage, adding directly as a bonus to thechance to cause a critical hit.
Initial Level. Starting critical chance is equal to your Luck.
Average characters will have a +5% critical chance.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—93

STEP #2: SELECT THREE TAG SKILLS
Skills are learned abilities.  As you gain experience, your skills
will improve, unlike your basic statistics.  All skills have a skill level,expressed as a percentage.  The higher the skill level, the more like-ly you are to succeed at using that skill.
Tag Skills define what skills you are especially good at.  They
are your specializations, if you will.  Every new vault-dweller mustselect three Tag Skills to specialize in.  You cannot leave the charac-ter editor without selecting all three.
You will get an immediate +20% in all three of your Tag Skills,
but even more importantly, they will grow faster from experiencethan a normal skill.  You will get twice the improvement when youspend skill points in them (see Experience, page 5—21).
Click on the skill name to display the information card.Click on the small button to the left of the skill name to Tag that
skill.  If you wish to deselect a Tag Skill, simply click the buttonagain.  Tag skills are highlighted in a different color to remind you oftheir status.
Some skills are automatically used when you do something.
Other skills require that you actively use them.  Those skills can beused from the Skilldex (see page 4—16).
To help you choose your Tag Skills, we now present the complete
skill list.
Complete Skill List
Small Guns, Big Guns, Energy Weapons, Unarmed, Melee
Weapons, and Throwing are all combat skills.  They govern the useof weapons and attacks in combat.  They are also used automatical-ly when you attack an opponent.
Small Guns. This skill covers the use of pistols, sub-machine
guns, rifles and shotguns.  The higher your Small Guns skill the eas-ier it will be for you to hit your target, and the longer effective rangeyou will have in combat.
Initial Level. Starting Small Guns skill is equal to 35% +
(1% x Agility).  Average characters will have a 40%.
Big Guns. This is the skill of flamers, miniguns, rocket
launchers and other large support weapons.  If it’s a large weapon,you can count on Big Guns being the skill rolled against.  Like SmallVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—10

Guns, the better your skill, the easier it will be to hit your target, and
the longer range you can really hit people at.
Initial Level. Starting Big Guns skill is equal to 10% + (1% x
Agility).  Average characters have a 15% skill.
Energy Weapons. The use of energy weapons is not a very
common skill in the Vault.  Energy weapons had just started to comeinto actual use in warfare, when the world blew up.  Lasers andPlasma weapons are covered by the Energy Weapons skill.  Basically,if it uses an energy cell or power pack, and not cartridge ammunition,it falls under this skill.
Initial Level. Starting Energy Weapons skill is equal to 10% +
(1% x Agility).  Average characters will have a 15% skill.
Unarmed.   This is the skill of beating people up with your fists
and feet.  The better you are at this skill, the more likely you aregoing to hit them in combat.  At very high skill levels, you can suc-ceed at those targeted shots easier, inflicting terrible damage.Everyone starts with a pretty good Unarmed skill, since the basicconcept is pretty simple.
Initial Level. Starting Unarmed skill is equal to 40% + (1% x
the average of your Agility and Strength).  Average characters willhave a 45% in Unarmed combat.
Speech.*   This is the skill of dialogue.  The better your Speech
skill, the more likely you will be able to get your way when talking topeople.  When there is a chance that the NPC might take your word,believe your lie, or just follow your word, this is the skill that is used.Automatic use.
Initial Level. Starting Speech skill is equal to 25% + (2% x
Charisma).  Average characters will have a 35% skill.
Barter.* The skill of trading.  In the post-nuclear world, cur-
rency is not used commonly.  Barter will allow you to get more for lesswhen trading equipment, weapons and other items.  A high Barterskill will lower the prices you pay for items you purchase, andincrease the money you get for selling excess equipment.  A goodBarter skill isn’t important if you’re killing everyone, but it certainlyis a valuable skill for the non-berserkers out there.  Automatic use.
Initial Level. Starting Barter skill is equal to 20% + (2% x
Charisma).  Average characters will have a 30% skill.
*NOTE: Speech and Barter are the domain of the
diplomatic character.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—113

Gambling.   The skill of Gambling lets you play games of
chance, and win more often.  As compared to playing games ofchance, and losing more often.  When the world comes to an end, andall that is left is a can of soup, some dweeb will bet it on a cockroachrace.  Automatic use.
Initial Level. Starting Gambling skill is equal to 20% + (3% x
Luck).  Average characters will have a 35% skill.
Outdoorsman.   This is the skill of outdoor living, and survival
in a hostile environment.  Not many people from the Vault are skilledin Outdoorsman!  Automatic use.
Initial Level. Starting Outdoorsman skill is equal to 5% + (1%
x the average of your Intelligence and Endurance).  Average charac-ters will have a 10% skill.
•WARNING• 
The following four skills are not approved by Vault-Tec
Sneak.   The skill of being able to move quietly and out of sight.
When you are Sneaking, and doing it successfully, other people willbe less likely to notice you – at a distance.  If you get too close to adangerous mutant, no matter how good you are at Sneaking, theywill notice you.  Active use.  Use Sneak to toggle it on and off.  Youautomatically stop Sneaking when you run.  While Sneaking, youwill see this:
In the display, just above the interface bar.  This doesn’t tell you
if you are Sneaking successfully.  The reactions from hostile, orinquisitive, creatures will tell you that.  Your Sneak skill is rolledwhen you start to Sneak, and every minute after that.
Initial Level. Starting Sneak skill is equal to 25% + (1% x
Agility).  Average characters will have a 30% Sneak.
Lockpick.   If you need to open locks without the proper key,
then this is the skill for you.  Having an actual lockpick will improveyour chances, but it is not necessary.  There are two types of locks inthe Fallout world: primitive and electronic.  Lockpicks work againstprimitive locks, and electronic lockpicks work on electronic locks.  Aparticular lock may be more difficult to pick than other locks. Activeuse.  Select a target to lockpick.
Initial Level. Starting Lockpick skill is equal to 20% + (1% x
the average of your Perception and Agility).  Average characters willhave a 25% skill.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—12


VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—13Steal.   This is the art of removing things from a person or
object, without being noticed.  Even if you succeed, there is a chancethat a critter might notice you.  Larger objects are more difficult tosteal than smaller objects.  The more objects you attempt to steal, themore likely you are to be noticed.  You cannot steal objects that a per-son has equipped.  If you steal from a person, it might be a good ideato go behind them so they can’t see you as easily.  Active use.  You willneed to pick a target to steal from.
Initial Level. Starting Steal skill is equal to 20% + (1% x
Agility).  The average character will have a 25% Steal skill.
Traps.   The skill of disarming bad things that will hurt you.
Your Perception will find them for you.  If you decide to set bad thingsfor other people (like explosives), then this is the skill that is used toset them.  A critical failure while setting an explosive will detonate itprematurely.  Active use, but sometimes used automatically.  You willneed to pick a target to attempt the disarming.
Initial Level. Starting Traps skill is equal to 20% + (1% x the
average of your Perception and Agility).  Average characters will havea 25% skill.
First Aid.* The skill of minor healing.  You will be able to cure
minor wounds, cuts and bruises with this skill.  You can only use itthree times a day, and it takes a little while to work.  Active use.Select a target to heal, but this is most likely going to be you!
Starting First Aid skill is equal to 30% + (1% x the average of your
Perception + Intelligence).  Average characters will have a 35% skill.
Doctor.*  A more advanced skill of healing.  You can heal seri-
ous damage and crippled limbs but not poison or radiation damage.Using this skill will take a while to perform.  Every crippled limb willadd to the time required to use the Doctor skill.  You can only use thisskill three times a day, but you can combine it with First Aid.  Activeuse.  You need to pick a target to play Doctor with.
Initial Level. Starting Doctor skill is equal to 15% + (1% x the
average of your Perception and Intelligence).  Average characters willhave a 20% skill.
*NOTE :First Aid and Doctor are healing skills.  They
will be very useful to all sorts of personnel.3

The last two skills are the scientific skills.
Science.   The skill of knowledge and learning.  It covers com-
puters, electronics, mechanical and other brain hurting tasks.  Activeuse, but sometimes used automatically.  You will need to pick a tar-get to sciencetize.
Initial Level. Starting Science skill is equal to 25% + (2% x
Intelligence).  Average characters will have a 35% Science skill.
Repair.   This is the physical use of Science.  Repair will let you
fix things, and in a world of broken stuff, this is a good thing.  Activeuse.  You will need to fix a target.
Initial Level. Starting Repair skill is equal to 20% + (1% x
Intelligence).  Average characters will have a 25% skill.
STEP #3: CHOOSE UP TO TWO TRAITS
Traits are characteristics that better define who you are.  They
don’t really fit into a single statistic or location, so we gave them theirown area - Traits.  All traits have a good impact and a bad impact.  Ifyou want the good effect of a trait, you must take the bad with it.
Fortunately, traits are optional.  You do not have to take any
traits, the choice is yours.  If you do want to select traits, you canselect up to two.  You must do it during character creation, since youcannot select a trait once you start the game.
To select a trait, click on the small button next to the trait name.
Selected traits will be highlighted.  Click the button of a selected traitto deselect it.
Fast Metabolism. Your metabolic rate is twice normal.  This
means that you are much less resistant to radiation and poison, butyour body heals faster.  +2 Healing Rate, but your radiation and poi-son resistances start at 0%.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—14
Figure 3-7: The list
of optional traitsin the charactereditor.

Bruiser.   A little slower, but a little bigger.  You may not hit as
often, but they will feel it when you do!  Your total action points arelowered, but your ST is increased.  Your Strength is +2, but you lose2 action points.
Small Frame.   You are not quite as big as the other vault-
dwellers, but that never slowed you down.  You can't carry as much,but you are more agile.  You get a +1 bonus to your Agility, but yourcarry weight is equal to 15 lbs. x your Strength.
One Hander. One of your hands is very dominant.  You excel
with single-handed weapons, but two-handed weapons cause a prob-lem.  You are -40% to hit with two-handed weapons, and +20% to hitwith weapons that only require one hand.
Finesse. Your attacks show a lot of finesse.  You don't do as
much damage, but you cause more critical hits.  All of your attacksdo -30% damage.  Your critical chance is +10%.
Kamikaze.   By not paying attention to any threats, you can act
a lot faster in a turn.  This lowers your armor class to just what youare wearing, but you sequence much faster in a combat turn.  Youhave no natural armor class.  You must wear armor to have an armorclass.  Your sequence gets a +5 bonus.
Heavy Handed.  You swing harder, not better.  Your attacks
are very brutal, but lack finesse.  Your rarely cause a good critical hit,but you always do more melee damage.  You do +4 points of damage
in melee combat (hand-to-hand or non-rangedweapons).  Your criticalhits have a -30% modi-fier to the critical hittables.
Fast Shot. You don't
have time to aim for atargeted attack,because you attackfaster than normal peo-ple.  It costs you oneless action point to usea weapon.  You cannotperform targeted shots,but all weapons haveAP -1 to use.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—15
Glowing objects are to be considered
dangerous at all times.  If an object hasenough illuminosity to read at night, donot touch!3

Bloody Mess. By some strange twist of fate, people around
you die violently.  You always see the worst way a person can die.  Ifthe violence meter in the Preferences screen (see page 4—35) isturned down, you will see the maximum level of violence for that set-ting of the meter.
Jinxed.   The good thing is that everyone around you has more
critical failures in combat, the bad thing is- so do you!  If you or anon-player character have a failure during combat, there is a greaterlikelihood that the failure will be upgraded (or is it downgraded) to acritical failure.  Critical failures are bad: weapons may explode, youmay attack the wrong target, you could lose part of your turn, or anyof a wide range of bad things.
Good Natured.   You studied less-combative skills as you were
growing up.  Your combat skills start at a lower level, but First Aid,Doctor, Speech and Barter are substantially improved.  Those skillsget a +20% bonus.  You get a -10% modifier to starting combat skills(Small Guns, Big Guns, Energy Weapons, Unarmed, and MeleeWeapons).  This is a one-time bonus only.
Chem Reliant.  You are more easily addicted to chems.  Your
chance to be addicted by chem use is twice normal, but you recoverfaster from their ill effects.
Chem Resistant. Chems only affect you half as long as nor-
mal, but your chance to be addicted is also only 50% of normal.
Night Person.   As a night-time person, you are more awake
when the sun goes down.  Your Intelligence and Perception areimproved at night, but dulled during the day.  You get a -1 modifierto these two statistics from the hours of 0601 to 1800.  You get a +1modifier to these statistics from the hours of 1801 to 0600 (or 6:00AMto 6:00PM, if you want to look at it that way).
Skilled.   Since you spend more time improving your skills than
a normal person, you gain more skill points.  The tradeoff is that youdo not gain as many extra abilities.  You will gain a perk every fourlevels.  You will get an additional 5 skill points per new experiencelevel.
Gifted.   You have more innate abilities than most, so you have
not spent as much time honing your skills.  Your statistics are betterthan the average person, but your skills are lacking.  All stats havea +1 modifier.  All skills are -10%.  You receive 5 less skill points perlevel.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—16

STEP #4: SELECT YOUR AGE
Not all people are the same.  Their age will tell a lot about them.
Your character’s age will help you better define your character.Personnel are ready to leave the vault at age 16, and will have lostthat sparkle in their step by the age of 35.  You can choose an inclu-sive age between 16 and 35.
Click on the AGE button to change from a bright youth, to an
experienced elder.  The left arrow will increase your age, while theright arrow will make you younger.  Age will have no direct influenceon your character during the character creation stage.
Age will have some small bearing on the game.  It is mostly a
player choice.  There is no direct penalty or benefit for playing ayounger or older character.
STEP #5: SELECT YOUR SEX
Your character, like most people before him or her, can be male
or female.  This will have some small bearing on the game, so choosecarefully.  It will not have a large bearing on the adventure, so don’tthink too much about it.  Some non-player characters will react dif-ferently to you if you are a man or a woman.
Click on the MALE/FEMALE button to bring up a small win-
dow.  Click on the symbol of the man if you want to be male, click onthe woman if you want to be female.
Enjoy your decision, as you cannot change it once you start the
game.
STEP #6: NAME YOUR CHARACTER
Click on the NAME button and type your character’s name.
Press ENTER when you are done, or click on the DONE button.  Ifyou want to change your name, this is the time to do it.  If you don’t,people will call you: “None,” the character with no name.
Your name should say something about your character.  Bob is
pretty boring (Vault-Tec apologizes to all vault-dwellers with thename of Bob for the use of that name in this example).  Spike is bet-ter, especially if you like to use a lot of sharp melee weapons.  Dr.Atomic is perfect for the budding young scientist type characters.
Once you complete the first six steps, you will have successfully
finished making your character.  Unless you need to use one of thecharacter editor options in step #7, you may skip to step #8 (seebelow) and start the game.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—173

STEP #7: CHARACTER EDITOR OPTIONS
To help you create or modify a personnel record, we have includ-
ed the following options - at no extra charge!  Select the OPTIONSbutton at the bottom of the character editor screen to access a specialOptions menu.
STEP #8: FINISHING YOUR CHARACTER
As previously mentioned, click DONE on the character creationVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 3—18
SAVE
If you want to save the status of your character during the creation process,select this option.  A Save Character window will appear, enter a file nameand press ENTER.
ERASEIf you are unhappy with the current character,and want to start fresh, then select this option.You will have a chance to confirm this operationbefore the current character is trashed.  Youhave been warned.LOADTo load a previouslysaved character, clickLOAD and then selectthe character from thesaved character list.This will overwrite thecurrent character.PRINT TO FILEIf you would like ahard copy of yourcharacter, select thisfunction.  It will askfor a file name, andthen write a textversion in the Falloutdirectory. If youprint it to a file, thecharacter is notautomatically saved.There is no way forFallout to restore acharacter from atext file version.
Figure 3-8: Character Editor Option screen.

Section IV.
INSTRUMENTATION
VDSG VTB-001-13-44

GENERAL
When you start Fallout, you can press the space bar or ESC
to bypass any movie.  You should not do this unless you have pre-viously viewed the movie.  Important information is containedwithin the movie segments.
The first thing you will see is the main menu.
MAIN MENU
The main menu is very simple.  From here, you can start a new
game, load a previously saved game, review the intro movie, see thecredit list, or exit back to your normal operating system.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—1
Figure 4-1:
Fallout Main
MenuINTRO
Replay the first two intro movies.  You can always press the space bar orESC to cancel a movie, but if you want to watch them again and again(we do) then use this feature.
CREDITSIf you want to see a list (avery long list) of thepeople who have workedon Fallout, this is thebutton to press.
NEW GAME
To start a brandnew game from thevery beginning,click on this button.You will then go tothe characterselection screen (seepage 4—2).  If youhave just installedFallout, this shouldbe your first choice.LOAD GAMETo restore apreviously savedgame, select thisoption.  You willgo to thestandard loadgame screen (seepage 4—35),where you canrestore any ofyour previouslysaved games.  Ifyou haven’tsaved a gameyet, then clickingthis button is notsuggested.
EXITClicking thisbutton will returnyou to yournormaloperatingsystem.  There isno confirmationnecessary.Thank you forplaying.4

CHARACTER SELECTION SCREEN
When you select NEW GAME from the main menu, you will see
this screen.  You have your choice of TAKING or MODIFYING one ofthe three pre-made characters, or CREATING your own characterfrom scratch.
If you press CANCEL, you will be returned to the main menu.
Once you have selected or created a character, the game will
start.  Press ESC to bypass the Overseerbriefing, once you have seen it.
You will start Fallout outside Vault-
13.  Your first mission is to explore thenearby area and then head for Vault-15,to the east.  You have to exit the cavernsto do this.
Using the Vault Instrumentation
panel, or the Interface, as it is more com-monly called, you will interact with thegame world and control your characterVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—2
Figure 4-2:
CharacterSelectionScreen.
In the event of exposure to radiation, you must
shower with a large amount of water as soonas possible.  Lather, rinse and repeat.

GAME VIEW
An example of the normal game view is below.
The top part of the screen is called the game view.  This is where
the action takes place.  Your character, and the non-player characters(NPCs) inhabit this part of screen.  It is in this view that you performmost of your actions, such as: moving around, grabbing items, talk-ing to people, fighting, opening doors, exploring, and more.
The bottom part of the screen is the interface bar.  Here you will
perform actions such as: accessing inventory, selecting a weapon toattack with, go to the character screen, select options, get feedbackfrom the display window and more.
INTERFACE BAR
The lower part of the normal game screen is called the interface
bar.  This is what it looks like:
A diagram and description of all the Interface Bar functions is
on the following pages.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—3
Figure 4-3:
Normal View!
Figure 4-4: The Interface Bar
4

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—4
DISPLAY MONITORSWITCH ACTIVE ITEM BUTTONCOMBAT BUTTONS (Covered)
PIPBOY BUTTON
CHARACTER BUTTONMAP BUTTONSKILLDEX BUTTON INVENTORY BUTTON
OPTIONS BUTTONACTION POINTS
ACTIVE ITEM BUTTONAMMO BAR
HIT POINT COUNTER
ARMOR CLASS COUNTER
Figure 4-5: Interface Bar Functions.

Display Monitor. The monitor prints out feedback as you per-
form actions.  These little messages are important, so try not to missany.  Fortunately, you can scroll back to older messages by movingthe cursor over the display until the cursor changes to a small arrow.
If the cursor is at the upper part of the display, then it will be
an up arrow.  Left-clicking now will scroll back to older messages.
If the cursor is at the bottom part of the display, then it will be
a down arrow.  Left-clicking now will scroll back to the more recentmessages.
If a new message is printed while you are reading older mes-
sages, the display will jump back and display this new message.Don’t be alarmed, this is good for you.
Switch Active Item Button. You can have two items pre-
pared for near instantaneous use, these are called Active Items.  Youprepare the items in Inventory (page 4—12).  This button will let youswitch between the two active items.  It’s a toggle.  Click it once, andyou go to Item 2.  Click it again, you go to Item 1.  Click it again, yougo to Item 2.  Click it again, you go to Item 1.  And so on.
Inventory Button. If you click this button, it will open
Inventory (see page 4—12).  In combat, this will cost you some actionpoints.  Even if you do nothing in inventory, you still lose the actionpoints.
Action Points. This row of lights will tell you how many action
points you have remaining.  Actions points are only used in combat, soif these lights are glowing, then you must be in combat.  As you useaction points, the lights will blink off.  When you get your full comple-ment of action points back at the start of a combat turn, the row oflights will light back up.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—5
Figure 4-6: Scrolling arrows.UP
ARROW
4

Options Button.   This button will display the options available:
See page 4—33 for more information regarding the various
options.
Active Item Button. This is where you current active item is
displayed.  Left-clicking on this large button will use the item.  Right-clicking will toggle between different modes (only weapons have dif-ferent modes).
The AP cost in the lower left-hand corner will tell you the number
of action points that using this item will cost you.  If you don’t haveenough action points remaining (see your action points bar above theactive item), then you cannot use this item this turn.  Action Pointsonly matter in combat.
Sometimes, there will be a mode or option in the upper right-hand
corner.  This is telling you what action using this item will perform.  Youcan sometimes right-click on this button to change the mode.
Some weapons can also make targeted shots.  This will always be
a different mode.  You will see a target in the lower right-hand cornerwhen the targeted shot mode is ready.
Ammo Bar. Some weapons and items have an ammo bar, show-
ing how many shots or uses they have left before running dry.  PayVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—6
Figure 4-7: Some options for you to choose.
SAVE GAME
This option will display the save game screen (see page 4—33).
EXITThis button will exit backto the main menu.  Youwill be given anopportunity to changeyour mind, in case youhaven’t saved your gamebefore this happens.  LOAD GAMEClicking this button willdisplay the load gamescreen (see page 4—35). PREFSThis buttondisplays thepreferencesscreen (seepage 4—35).
DONEThis buttonwill returnback to thegame.

close attention to this bar.  When the bar is full, you have all or most
of your ammo available.  The bar will drop when you use these con-sumables.  When you are dry, the bar will disappear.
To get more specific information about your ammo or energy
count, use an Examine on the item (see page 4—10).
Hit Point Counter. This counter will show the number of hit
points remaining.  When you are healthy, the counter will be in white.When you are hurt, the counter will be yellow.  When you are close todeath, the counter is in red.
If your hit points ever reach 0, you die and the game is over.  You
will need to reload a previously saved game, or start the game overfrom the very beginning.
Armor Class Counter. Your current armor class, based on your
character and what armor you are wearing, is shown here.  Duringcombat, this counter may go up and down.  If you have any extra actionpoints when you end your turn, they are converted to an armor classbonus.  This would explain the changes you may see.
Skilldex Button. Pressing this button will display the Skilldex
(see page 4—16).
Map Button.  Pressing this button will display the Automap
(see page 4—24).
Character Button. Pressing this button will display the
Character Screen (see page 4—17).
PIPBoy Button. Pressing this button will display the RobCo
PIPBoy 2000 (see page 4—20).
Combat Buttons. When you are involved in combat, the panel
covering these two buttons will slide open, revealing:VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—74
Figure 4-8: The two combat buttons.END TURN
BUTTONPressing thisbutton will endyour currentcombat turn.END COMBAT BUTTONPressing this button willattempt to end combat.  Ifthere are hostile critters nearbythat want to continue combat,you may be out of luck.

INVENTORY BAR VS. CURSORS
If you have a cursor, like a skill target cursor, or a targeting cur-
sor, moving it over the interface bar will cancel that action and give youthe normal mouse pointer instead.  If you want to shoot someone tostart combat, click the weapon in the active item button, and move thelittle red crosshair out to the game view.  Move the crosshair back tothe interface bar to stop the attack.
CURSORS
Action Cursor. You control your character with the Action
Cursor, a simple device that will take a brief moment to learn.  TheAction Cursor allows your character to move, fight, and interact withthe environment and to manipulate objects.
In the normal game view, there are three modes the Action
Cursor can be in:
Movement       Command       Targeting
The third mode, targeting, is only available during combat or
when you attempt to target a weapon to start combat.
To change between the various modes, right-click once.  If you
continue to right-click, it will cycle to the next mode.  To get to thecommand cursor from movement, right-click once.  Outside of com-bat, another right-click will take you back to the movement cursor.During combat, a right-click from the command cursor will go to thetargeting cursor.
MOVEMENT CURSOR
The default cursor is the
movement cursor, also called ahex cursor.
To walk, move the hex cursor around the screen to where you
want to walk to and then click the left mouse button. If the route tothe destination is clear, your character will find the shortest path tothe destination. If you can’t walk to the location, a red X will appearin the center of the hex cursor.  If you attempt to left-click while thereis an X, it will do nothing.  If you want more control over where youwalk, click closer to your character and make shorter walks.
If you want to run, hold down a SHIFT key while you left-click.
You can interrupt your character in mid-step, simply click the leftVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—8
Figure 4-9: The
movement, orhex, cursor.

mouse button with the hex cursor in a new spot.  Your character will
immediately move towards the new location.
COMMAND CURSOR
Walking is fine and dandy, but
if you want to interact with some-thing (like opening a door, or talk-ing to a person), you need to use the command cursor.
Use this cursor to point to the object or person that you wish to
interact with.  If you move the cursor over an object, and let it restfor just a second, an icon will appear next to the cursor.  This icon istelling you what the default action is if you left-click the mouse but-ton while over this object.  You do not have to wait for the icon toappear before you click!
To do the default action, left-click once.If you want to see other actions that you can take, left-click and
hold the mouse button.  A column of action icons will appear.  Whileholding the mouse button down, move the mouse up or down.  Thehighlighted action icon is the action you will perform when yourelease the mouse button.
Pausing the command cursor over an object for a moment will
also display the name of the object in the display window on theinterface bar below.  To get more information about the item, use theExamine action (see page 4—10).
A list of the action icons is on the following pages.
TARGETING CURSOR
When you click on the active
item button on the interface bar,while it is showing a weapon in anattack mode, you will get the targeting cursor.  Often you will wantto do this to start a fight.  You will also see this cursor commonly dur-ing combat, so get used to it.
If you hover this cursor over an acceptable target (like that guy
over there who gave you a dirty look, or that salivating radscorpion),then you will get either a number or a red X.
The number is your percent chance to hit, modified by the light
level, the range, your skill and it’s armor class.
The X means that you cannot possibly hit the target.See Chance to Hit (page 5—4) for more information.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—94
Figure 4-11: The
targeting cursor.
Figure 4-10: The
command cursor.

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—10ACTION ICONS
USE ITEM/GET
Performing this action will attempt to pick up an inventory item (likea rock), or use a scenery item (like a door).  Basically, if the item issmall, it will attempt to add it to your inventory.  If you have enoughroom in your inventory, the item will be added to the bottom of thelist.  If the item is large, you will attempt to manipulate it somehow.
You can get inventory items, loot bodies, and use scenery objects.
ICON DESCRIPTION
EXAMINE
If you want more detail about an object or person, use this action.You will get a longer description of the item or person, often withimportant information (like how much ammo is left in a gun, or howwounded a person appears to be).
You can examine virtually anything in the game.
USE SKILL ON
To use one of the skills that require your active use, you can selectthis action.  The skilldex will be displayed and you can select theskill that you want to use on this item.  Some skills are notavailable, depending on what the object is that you are using thisaction icon on.
You can use this icon on any object that a skill can be used on.
DROP ITEM
Only available in inventory.  If you no longer want to carry an itemaround, and your inventory is getting a little crowded, then use thisaction.  It will drop the item at your feet.  Use this action carefully.  Ifyou drop an important item, then the game could be lost.  It’spossible to return later and pick the object up, but it’s also possiblethat the object will disappear forever.
This obviously only works on inventory items in your inventory.
ROTATE CHARACTER
Your facing can be important.  To rotate your character clockwise usethis action.  Every click will rotate you one hex-facing.  There is noAction Point cost to use this action in combat.
This action only works on yourself.


VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—11ACTION ICONS
ICON DESCRIPTION
UNLOAD AMMO
If you want to remove ammo from a gun, then use this action.  It willwork in the inventory or loot screens.  Often, you will want to just takethe ammo from a dead opponent, and leave the heavy gun behind.Or, you might want to change the type of ammo you have in yourfavorite firearm.  This is the perfect way to handle these situations.
Only works on weapons that contain ammo, and only in the
inventory and loot screens.
CANCELIf you don’t want to perform any of the above actions on the target,select the cancel action, and it will be as if nothing happened.
Always available, from everywhere on everything.
TALK
If you want to communicate (and, hey, who wouldn’t?), then thisaction is for you.  Talking will attempt to start a dialogue with aliving, breathing person.  You cannot talk to the dead, or theunconscious.  Some people will not want to talk to you, anyways.Others will only have a little to say, and their comments will appearover their head in the game view.  If someone has a lot to say, thenyou will go to the Dialogue screen (see page 4—28).
Also, modern computers have voice inputs, so you can actually talk
to a think machine or a computer workstation, in some cases.
This action only works on people, and some computers.
USE INVENTORY ITEM ON
If you want to heal a person with a stimpak, or use a set of lockpickson a “stuck” door, then use this action.  Once you select your target,and use this action icon, a small version of your inventory willappear.  Scroll down, if necessary, and select the item you wish touse, and your character will attempt to use it on the target.
Obviously, using a piece of fruit on a door isn’t going to do much,
but that same piece of fruit can be given to another person to eat.
See Inventory (page 4—12) and Equipment (page5—14) for more
information.
This action will work on people and on scenery objects.4

INVENTORY
Your inventory screen is where you keep track of, and use, items
that you may find in your adventures.  You can carry a maximumweight of items equal to your carry weight.  Items will have a differentweight.  Examine an item to get the individual weight of that item.
You have an inventory cursor and an inventory action cursor.
Right-click, like normal, to switch between them.
The inventory cursor looks
like a hand, and allows you to pickup and drop items.  Click on anitem and hold the mouse buttondown.  Move the mouse to thedesired location and release thebutton to drop the item on it’s new spot.  If you are moving more thanone item, then when you drop the item into it’s new location, a spe-cial menu will appear.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—12
Figure 4-12:
Your inventoryscreen.
Figure 4-14:
Moving multipleitems at once.
Figure 4-13: The
inventory handcursor.

Click the arrow buttons to increase or decrease the number of
items to move.  The counter starts at one (1) item.  Press the ALL but-ton to increase the counter to total number of items in the stack.Select CANCEL to cancel the entire move.  You will also get thismenu if you drop a stack of items.
If you move COMPLETELY IDENTICAL items on to each other,
they will “stack”.  Stacked items are a little more convenient.  If youhave stacked items, a number will appear on the stack, showing thenumber of items in the stack.  In the case of ammunition, it will showthe total number of rounds in the stack, not the number of maga-zines.  When you move ammo, you move it by magazine not by indi-vidual rounds.  Get that?
The inventory action cursor allows you to perform actions on
items in your inventory.  The USE action will use the item automat-ically on you.  The DROP icon will drop the item to the ground.  Youwill be able to pick the item up again, under 99.9% of the circum-stances.  If you leave the item around, it is possible that it will bepicked up by another character.  And if you drop an item while in thedeserted wastes of the world map, you will never see it again.  Sothink carefully before you drop an item.  Loose hands drop clams!
The inventory screen is divided into three parts: Display
Monitor, Equipped Items, and Inventory List.
The Display Monitor gives you important information about
your character, and items that you examine.  As you move inventoryitems around, the Display Monitor will update to show you the newstatistics of weapons, armor and other pieces of equipment.  Use thedisplay monitor to compare two different weapons, for example, andyou will be ahead of the game!
The Equipped Items include what armor you are wearing and
what two items you have prepared as active items.  A viewer showsyou with your equipped items.
The Inventory List shows the remaining items in your back-
pack.  They aren’t as immediately accessible as your active items, butthis only really matters during combat.
INVENTORY DISPLAY MONITOR
When you first enter the inventory screen, or when you do an
examine on your character portrait, you will get some basic informa-tion about you.  VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—134

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—14
Figure 4-15: The inventory display.
NAME
Just in caseyou forgot.
HITPOINTSCurrent/MaximumSTYour Strength, including any modifiersfrom radiation, chems, or other effects.This is known as your current Strength.PEYour current Perception.
ENYour current Endurance.
CHYour current Charisma.
INYour current Intelligence.
AGYour current Agility.
LKYour current Luck.
CURRENT ACTIVEITEMSWeapons will showbasic damage, ammoloaded, range and otherpertinent information.Other items will havebrief descriptions ofimportant information.
ARMOR CLASSThis area shows the armor class, damage resistance and damage thresholdfor the armor you are currently wearing.  Normal damage is bullets, knivesand blunt objects (like that big, ugly fist that you see coming towards youright now).  Laser damage is from lasers.  Fire damage is from flamers.Plasma damage is from advancedweapons.  Explosion damage isfrom explosives, like grenades androckets.  EMP (electro-magneticpulse) damage doesn’t affecthumans, so it is not listed.
Armor Class
Damage
Resistance
Damage ThresholdTOTAL WEIGHTThis shows how muchequipment you are carryingin pounds.  You cannotcarry more than your CarryWeight.  If this number getsclose to your maximumcarry weight, you shouldstart considering what itemsto drop.  There is nodisadvantage for carrying alot of equipment. 

AMMO ACTIONS
Loading Weapons.   You can drag ammo to a gun, and it will
attempt to load the gun.  To the load the gun successfully, the ammocaliber must be the same (examining the weapon and the ammo willtell you their calibers).  The ammo type must be the same, as well.  Youcannot partially load a gun with hollowpoints and then fill it up witharmor piercing.  If the gun is completely loaded, you will not be able tostuff more ammo in it, obviously.
Unloading Weapons.   To unload a weapon, use the inventory
action cursor and select the Unload icon.  The ammo will appear inyour inventory.
You can also unload weapons from a loot screen.  It is easier to
carry any recovered ammo without carrying duplicate versions of theweapon itself.  It also weighs less to only carry the ammo.
OTHER INVENTORY ACTIONS
Inventory List.   The final part of your inventory is the list of
items that you are carrying.  This is called the inventory list.  It is along bar on the left-hand side of the screen.
If you want to move an item up or down the list, simply pick it up
and drag it to it’s new location.
If you drag completely identical items on to each other, they will
stack.  Weapons are only identical if they contain the same exactamount of ammo, and the ammo itself is the same.  Therefore, weaponswill not stack very often.
Containers.   Containers are a special kind of item that can store
items within themselves.  A backpack, or a bag, would be a container.Containers don’t let you carry more equipment than you can lift (yourcarry weight), but they do let you organize items better.
You can drag items to the container from the main inventory list.
Simply drop the item on the container to add it to the container.
To open a container, use the inventory action cursor and select the
Use icon.  The viewer will be replaced with an image of the container,and the inventory list will show what is in the container.
If you want to move items out of the container and back into the
main inventory list, drag the item to the image of the viewer.
To close the container click on the image in the viewer.Containers cannot stack.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—154

SKILLDEX
Some skills are used automatically, like the combat skills.  When
you shoot a gun, you are automatically using the appropriate skills.Other skills need an active use by you.  These skills are available inthe Skilldex.
Click on a skill name to
use it.  Most skills will require atarget to use the skill on.  If youwant to cancel a skill use beforeyou select a target, move thecursor over the interface bar.
As a shortcut the skills can
be used by pressing the 1through 8 keys.  Do this, itsaves valuable time.
Only Sneak will work with-
out a target (since it’s just some-thing you do).  To stop Sneaking,you can either toggle it off byusing the Skilldex again, or byrunning.  As a reminder, whenyou are Sneaking, you will see aSneak icon just above the inter-face bar.
See page 3—10 for a list of
the skills and their uses.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—16
Figure 4-16: Your Skilldex
Proper latrine building is an
important outdoor survivalskill.  Practice this skill asoften as possible.

CHARACTER SCREEN
While the Inventory screen is nice for giving you a brief rundown
on your character, the only place to get all the information is on theCharacter screen.  You can access the Character screen from the inter-face bar.
The primary purpose of the Character screen is to give you infor-
mation about the status of your character: am I critically hurt? if so,where? poisoned? how many experience points do I have?  when do I goup a level?  how many extra skill points do I have?  what are my exactskill levels? and more…
So many questions, it takes a whole screen to give you the
answers.
If you made your own character, or modified one of the three pre-
made characters, then most of this screen will be pretty familiar toyou.  If you didn’t, then it might take you a little longer to get used toVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—17
Figure 4-17: Main Character screen.EXPERIENCE POINT
TOTAL & LEVELPERKS, KARMA & KILLSCURRENT MEDICAL STATUSWatch this space.
4

it, but it’s not that difficult.
You can click on any text or object of importance on this screen,
and the character card in the lower right-hand corner will display moreinformation for you.
The right side of the screen will give your character name (in case
you forgot) and your current primary statistics.
Immediately below that is your experience point total and level.
As you gain experience for performing deeds and combat, the numbersin this area will change.  The “Level” is your current character level,the higher the better.  The “EXP” is obviously how much experienceyou have earned to this point.  The more the merrier.  The “Next Level”line is showing how much experience you have to earn until your nextlevel advancement.
In addition to your current and maximum hit point information,
which you can find elsewhere as well (on the interface bar and in theinventory screen), the character sheet will show other important med-ical problems with your character.
The text lines beneath Hit Points should be a dull green.  That’s
a good thing.  If the lines are bright green, that means that you havethat particular problem.
“Poisoned” means that you have been poisoned.  Poison in Fallout
is fairly dangerous if not treated, but is usually not fatal.  Poison doesdamage over time.  The more poison you have been infected with, thelonger you will take damage.  Fortunately, as the poison starts to wearoff, it takes longer and longer after the poison hurts you before it hurtsyou again.  Still, avoid it if you can.
“Radiated” means that you have a measurable amount of radia-
tion damage.  Radiation still lingers in the form of fallout (note thelower-case version of this noun, as compared to Fallout - an importantdifference) and other hot spots.  It has been rumored that there arecreatures that have been exposed to such a large amount of radiationthat they can actually cause radiation damage by contact.  Avoid themif you can.  Radiation can have several bad effects, but in general, themore radiation damage you have accumulated, the worse the effect willbe.  You can tell the exact amount of radiation you have been exposedto by using a Geiger counter.  You can get treatment for radiation in theVault Emergency Medical Lab, located near the entrance.  It is possi-ble that other locations may be able to repair radiation damage.
“Eye Damage,” “Crippled Right Arm,” “Crippled Left Arm,”
“Crippled Right Leg,” and “Crippled Left Leg” are all crippled limbs orbody parts.  You will generally receive these special types of damage inVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—18

combat.  It is possible to heal these serious wounds at the Vault EML,
by using the Doctor skill, or a visit to another trained medical person-nel.  The effects of these severe inflictions are cumulative.
Above the character card (with the trademarked Vault-Man) are
your character skills.  If you have any spare skill points (any numberabove 000), then you can spend them on this screen to improve yourskills (see Experience, page 5—21 for more information).
As your character explores the world, makes decisions and gains
experience, you will be able to track some of that by using this handymulti-data display area.
The first electronic data card is “Perks.”  This will show all the
Perks that you have chosen for your character, and let you examine theeffects of a Perk by using the character card.  And, as a bonus, if youselected any Traits, they will be displayed on this card as well.
The second data card is “Karma.”  If you’ve been naughty or nice,
this will be displayed here.  All characters have a Reputation.  It startsVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—19Table 4-1   P ERSONAL DAMAGE EFFECTS
DAMAGE EFFECTS
Eye Damage ..................If your eyes are hurt, your Perception will be
lowered until you heal this wound.  Rangedcombat will be much more difficult as a result.
Arm Damage ..................If one of your arms is hurt, you cannot use
two-handed weapons.  If both arms are crip-pled, you cannot use any weapons at all.
Leg Damage.................... If one leg is crippled, you will find it more
difficult to move (taking more ActionPoints to move the same distance).  It willalso be impossible to run.  If both legs arecrippled, you will barely be able to move.Running will still be impossible.  Out ofcombat, your character will look like he orshe is walking normally, but this is asham to protect yourself from dangerouspredators.  Get to a doctor quickly!
4

at 0 (zero).  If you act nobly, and perform great deeds, your character’s
reputation will rise (or go positive).  If you act like a Commie, or othernegative personality type, your character’s reputation will sink (or gonegative).  Your characters reputation will affect different people in dif-ferent ways.  “Good” people will react positively to a good reputation,and poorly to a negative reputation.  “Bad” people will react in theopposite manner.  You may get other, specific reputations as well, oryou could react poorly to chems.  If you do, these reactions to youractions will show up under Karma.  Use the character card to find outmore information.
The third card is “Kills”.  As one could expect from the title of this
data card, this will show how many of what you have slain in battle.Think of it as a score card.  You might be interested in knowing thatthe number of things slain (which can include people, animals, dan-gerous mutants) will have an effect on your game.  The more you kill,the greater the effect.  The exact ramifications of your kills will be dis-covered as you play.
On the right-hand bottom part of the screen are three buttons:
PRINT, CANCEL and DONE.
Print
This option will let you save the current record of your character
as a text file on your own computer.  Trade it with your friends, orgloat loudly.  Select this option, and another screen will appear.  Typein the name of the text file as you want it to be, and press ENTER.
Cancel
Return to the game.  Any changes that you have made to your
character since entering the character screen will be ignored, andyour character returned to the state he or she was in before youentered the character screen
Done
Accept any changes to your character and return to the game.
ROBCO PIPBOY 2000
To help Vault Dwellers record information (and information is
extremely valuable, in fact, it might be the most valuable weapon wehave against the end of civilization, so pay attention!), Vault-Tec hasselected the RobCo Industries RobCo PIPBoy 2000 as the PersonalInformation Processor of choice for its Vault Dwellers.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—20

The RobCo PIPBoy 2000 (hereafter called the PIPBoy), is a
handy device that you wear on your wrist.  It’s small, especially bytoday’s standards, and it will store a goodly amount of informationfor you. And using modern super-deluxe resolution graphics to boot!
Use the buttons to select the various functions of the PIPBoy.
Some of the function screens have text in the display window thatcan be selected as well. These text buttons will change brightness
when you move the mouse over them.
Status
Click on this button to view the current status of any adventure
seed or task that you are on.  The adventures will be sorted by loca-tion.  Seeds that you are currently on, and have not finished, will belisted in green.  Seeds that you have completed will be crossed out.As you get new tasks to perform, they will show up here.
Automaps
Click on this button to display a list of the locations you have
visited.  Select a location to view the automaps for that location.  YourPIPBoy stores a map of all the locations you visit automatically.  Ifyou have a question of where a location is, use the Automap feature.
Archives
The PIPBoy also has a video recorder.  All movies are automat-
ically recorded by the PIPBoy for later viewing.  Select any previous-ly viewed movie to watch it from here.
Close
Power down the PIPBoy for now and return to the Fallout world.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—21
Figure 4-18:
The RobCoPIPBoy 2000main screeninterface.
4

PIPBOY CLOCK
The PIPBoy also contains an alarm clock.  To pass time quickly in
the Fallout world, use this alarm clock to rest until the time you set.
This part of the PIPBoy will constantly show the current game
date and time.  Click on the alarm clock icon to display the list oftimer settings.
The various timer settings allow you to rest or sleep for:
10 minutes30 minutes1 hour2 hours3 hours4 hours5 hours6 hoursUntil 0600 (6:00AM)Until 1200 (12:00PM - Noon)Until 1800 (6:00PM)Until 0000 (12:00AM - Midnight)Until healedVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—22
Figure 4-19: The RobCo PIPBoy 2000 Alarm Clock optional
feature.  Standard on all Vault-Tec supplied versions.
Figure 4-20: The RobCo
PIPBoy 2000 Alarm Clocktimer settings.

Use the 10 minute to 6 hour timers if you need to meet someone
at a certain time during the day or night.  Some events only occur dur-ing the night or day.  Some shops are only open at night, for example.
The until timers will advance the clock to the time you select.
These are more powerful versions of the normal timers.  Outside loca-tions will follow a day and night cycle for the lighting.  If you don’t likethe dark, sleep until 0600 and then wait for an hour.  If you want thenight, sleep until 1800 and then wait an hour.
The alarm clock will show your current and maximum hit points.
If you rest, you will gain hit points back at a faster rate.  You get yourhealing rate in restored hit points every six hours.  Sleep until themorning and get a good nights rest.  Optionally, you can use the restuntil healed timer setting, and then you will sleep until you arerestored to maximum hit points.
You can press ESC while resting to wake up.
THINGS TO DO!
The PIPBoy 2000 can be used to keep track of important dates
and events.
Use it to remember everyone’s birthday’s and anniversaries so
that you
Elephants marries Afghanistan. Five Jabberwockies perused one
wart hog, although the trailer marries almost silly aardvarks, and fivepartly angst-ridden sheep tickled Tokyo, however two wart hogs lame-ly kisses Afghanistan, yet the obese trailergossips.
and it is a very useful tool for scheduling meetings and appointments.
And your PIPBoy has been programmed to properly handle all
calendar dates, even after the turn of the century!
1VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—231Your PIPBoy 2000 has a three month limited warranty.4
We reprogrammed your PIPBoy to keep track of the
number of days remaining in the Vault water stores.  Thisnote is the only thing you should care about until we aresafe and have a restored waterprocessing chip.
The note shows the number of days
before we croak.  If that happens,
your adventures on the outside won’t be worth a set of thermalunderwear in Death Valley at highnoon!  We’ll be dead.  And we don’t want that.  Go to it!

AUTOMAP
To remind you where you have been, your helpful PIPBoy 2000
keeps track of all the locations you have visited, and what theylooked like.  These are stored in the Automap function.  As youexplore a map, more of it will be revealed and stored.  The automapwill keep track of all the walls and buildings that you come across.
As a helpful shortcut, you can access the automap for the town
you are in by pressing this MAP button on the interface bar.  It willonly show the current level of the location.  To see the other locations,you must access the full Automap list from the PIPBoy.
The Hi/Lo toggle will change between high and low resolution.
On high resolution, you can see more detail.  The low resolution issometimes easier to read.
The Scanner button will activate the Motion Sensor, if it is one
of your active items.  The Motion Sensor will display the other crea-tures and people on the map, in addition to yourself.  The motion sen-sor will only work on the current map, you cannot scan a map thatyou are not on currently.
The CANCEL button will return you to the game.
WORLD MAP
The game view and automap are great for small areas, but the
wasteland is a large place.  To move from location to location, youneed the world map.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—24
Figure 4-21:
A displayedautomap.

You go to the World Map when you reach the edge of a game
map, as shown here:
Walking into that dark area will automatically transport you to
the world map.  You can use this to escape from a hostile location, butdon’t expect a happy welcome when you return.
The world map looks something like this:
Click on the TOWN/WORLD MAP button to switch between the
town (see page 4—27) and world maps.
As you start, most of the world will be dark.  These are places that
you have not yet explored.  The immediate area around you has beenslightly illuminated.  You have seen it, but not yet been there.  Whenyou do walk into a new area of the world map, it is brightened and thesquares around it have been marked as viewed from a distance.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—25
Figure 4-22: The dark
areas show where youwill exit the game map.
Figure 4-23:
The FalloutWorld.Pretty dark.4

Click on the world map to start traveling to that location.  You
can click into the darkness, in fact you need to do that to explore theunknown areas ahead of you.
The date and time are shown in the upper right-hand corner.
Time is a critical aspect of Fallout.  Try to accomplish your goals inas little time as possible.  Traveling across the world will be one ofyour largest wastes of time.  Travel as carefully as possible.  The peo-ple of the Vault are depending on you.
Important locations are marked with a green circle on the world
map.  Every important location is therefore a little easier to see.Once you have visited an important location, it will be added to thelist on the right-hand side of the world map screen.
To visit a previously explored location, all you have to do is click
on the button next to the location name.  You will start movingtowards that location automatically.
When you reach your destination, via the location bar or by
exploration, an upside down green triangle will appear.  Click on thetriangle to visit that location.  You can always click on a new area toexplore, if you want to continue on.
If you are interrupted by a random encounter, you will see a
flashing red lightning bolt.  You will then automatically drop down tothe terrain map and be involved in the encounter.  Any items left ona random encounter map after you leave the map will be lost forever.
TERRAIN
Some terrain is more difficult to travel than others.  In Fallout,
there are four different types of basic terrain: Mountain, Desert, Cityand Coastland.  Mountain terrain is the most difficult to move overand will take the longest amount of time.  Desert and Coastland ter-rain are normal.  City terrain, even with the ruins, is easiest to trav-el and will take a shorter amount of time than normal.
Terrain will also determine what kind of encounters you may
have.  More people will be found closer to cities and spots of civiliza-tion.  Monsters, and other bad things, are found farther away fromthese places of humanity.  You are more likely to have a lot of randomencounters in some areas than others.  If you are being beat to deathby random encounters, pull back and try a different area until yougain experience, skills and equipment.
Some of the encounters may be hostile creatures, friendly
traders, environmental concerns (like radiation hotspots) and other,VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—26

more bizarre events.  Not all random encounters are bad, but neither
are they all good.
TOWN MAPS
All of the important locations in the game will have a town map,
or a closer view of the area.  The town maps serve several functions.In addition to being an aid to remember what areas are at a particu-lar location, they are useful for movement.
To access the town maps, click on the TOWN/WORLD MAP but-
ton on the world map screen.  A town map will appear.
To change town maps, click on a known location button on the
right-hand side of the screen.  You can only view the town maps oflocations you have visited.
Notice that the town map has one or more inverted green trian-
gles.  These location markers will access different areas within thetown.  Move the cursor over a marker to view the name of the specif-ic area that marker represents.  Click the marker to travel to thatarea within the town.  This will work even if you are hundreds ofmiles away.  You will travel via the world map to their chosen loca-tion, and then enter the town there.
When you visit a new town, usually only one marker will be
available.  As you explore a town, more markers will become accessi-ble.  It is possible for a previously accessible marker to disappear.  Ifthis happens, you have usually done something to incur the wrath ofthe natives in that location.  You will have to find another way to getfrom one area to the next.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—27
Figure 4-24:
The Vault-13town map.
4

DIALOGUE
Talking to people will take some of your time, and a lot of your
attention, to perform properly.  You must balance their reaction toyou, what you can say to them, and at the same time, watch for clues.The payoff can be worth it.
To start talking to people, use the command cursor and the Talk
action icon.  The Talk icon is the default, or standard, action whenyou click on a person.  Some people will initiate dialogue on theirown, but all dialogue works the same once you start a conversation.
There are two different types of dialogue: chatting and extend-
ed dialogues.
CHATTING DIALOGUE
If someone has very little to say to you, and you don’t have a
response, then they will just chat with you.  A line of dialogue willappear over their head in the main game view, and you will notswitch to the full, extended dialogue screen.  Normally, chats areinconsequential, but you should watch carefully.  Sometimes a personwill sneak important clues into a single chat.  Sometimes a personwill order you to do something, and if you persist in your currentaction, they may get very upset with you.
People will also chat during combat.  These are called combat
taunts.  They usually don’t have very many nice things to say toyou then.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—28
Figure 4-25:
A sample ofchattingdialogue.

EXTENDED DIALOGUE
If someone has more to say to you than can be said in a line or
two of dialogue, or if you will have the opportunity to question themand respond to what they have to say, then you will go to the fullextended dialogue screen.
The extended dialogue screen has a place for you to see a close
up of the NPC (if one exists), or a shot of the character you are talk-ing to standing around in the game view, their dialogue, and yourpossible responses.
If the NPC does have a head, watch their expression for clues on
their reaction to you.  NPCs with heads will also have actual speech,and you should listen closely to their lines to determine if there isanything special about what they have to say.
All NPCs will have a different reaction to you.  They may like
you, they may hate you, or they may care less.  Most people will startout caring less, but your actions, reputation, and responses to theirdialogue will change their opinion about you.  Your Charisma willmodify their initial reaction.
The NPC will usually have something to say to you.  Their dia-
logue will appear below their portrait or picture.  If the text of theirdialogue will not fit within one screen, their dialogue will be dis-played one screen at a time, until you see their entire speech.
Below their dialogue are your choices.  Based on your
Intelligence, and what you know about the game world, you will haveone or more options.  If you only see [DONE], that means the con-versation is over.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—29
Figure 4-26:
Extendeddialogue, inthe middle of aconversation.
4

If you have a character with a high Intelligence, you will be able
to say more in conversation.  NPCs will react differently to a gruntfor help compared to a well-discussed plea for mutual assistance.The most intelligent things that you can say are not always the bestlines to choose.  A character with an Intelligence of 3 or less will be adistinct disadvantage, unable to converse normally.  People will havea hard time understanding your grunts and unintelligent speech.
To pick a line of dialogue for your character to say, move the
mouse pointer over the line, and when it highlights, click the mousebutton to actually say that line.  The NPC will usually respond toyour comment or question, and you will get a new batch of respons-es.  Dialogue will continue until you run out of things to say, or untilyou say something that really angers the NPC.
Some of the lines have a chance of making the NPC respond one
way or another.  These lines will usually have some sort of roll asso-ciated with them (usually Speech, but sometimes another skill oreven a statistic).  For example, if you tell a lie there is a possibilitythat the NPC will see through your deception and get upset.  SomeNPCs may be more gullible or perceptive than others, so there can bea modifier to your skill or statistic.  These special lines are notmarked.  You will have to discover which lines have attached rolls bydiscovery, trial and error.  Common sense will help, too.
REVIEW
If you want to review the current conversation, click the
REVIEW button on the dialogue screen.  You will be able to see whatthe NPC said, your response, and so on.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—30
Figure 4-27:
Reviewing animportantdialogue.

The arrows will move the conversation up and down, in case it
goes on longer than one screen.  Press the DONE button to return tothe conversation.
You cannot review a previous conversation once you leave a
dialogue.
BARTER
Barter is the exchange of goods.  Trade.In a post-nuclear world, Vault-Tec believes there will be no real
monetary system.  People must resort to the ancient tradition ofbarter to exchange goods for goods, or goods for services.
To access the bartering interface, click the BARTER button
from the dialogue screen.  If the character wishes to barter with you,and most will, then the barter interface will slide up and cover yourresponse area.
If you decide to cancel bartering, click on the TALK button.To barter with an NPC, you must trade an equal amount of
goods (in his or her eye).  Your Barter skill will modify the worth ofitems in your inventory.  A high Barter skill will make your loot morevaluable.  A low Barter skill will mean that you have to give more toget the same amount from an NPC.
Your inventory list is on the left-hand side.  The equipment and
items that the NPC is willing to barter away is on the right-handside.  The table in between the two inventory lists is where the bar-tering will take place.
Take items that you are willing to give up and place them on the
left-hand side of the table.  You cannot place items from your inven-tory directly into the NPCs inventory, nor can you take items direct-ly from his inventory and put it into yours.  You must use the table.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—31
Figure 4-28: The bartering interface.
4

Moving multiple items will display the Move Item interface.
Move the items from the NPC inventory list that you want.
When you have moved what you feel is a fair deal, press the OFFERbutton.  If the NPC is agreeable, he will say so in his dialogue screen.If he doesn’t like the deal, he will say so, too.  If you get an agreeabledeal,  the items that you are trading will move from the table to theappropriate inventory list.
If the deal is not agreeable to the NPC, you can sweeten the
offer by placing more equipment from your inventory on your side ofthe table.  Or you can reduce how much you want from the NPC bymoving some of his items back to his inventory.  Then press theOFFER button again, until you get an agreeable trade.
You can always cancel the barter and return to the regular dia-
logue screen.
Your reputation and reaction from the NPC will modify how
they deal with you.  If you have a good reaction with the NPC trad-er, you will get a better deal.  If he doesn’t like you, you will pay forit – literally.  Your Barter skill, however, is the primary factor, alongwith the Barter skill of the NPC.  The higher your skill, the betterdeal you will get.  The higher the Barter skill of the NPC, the betterdeal they will get!  A really poor trade offer may lower the reaction ofthe NPC.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—32
In the event of fire, do not run!  It will force the flames up to your
head.  Stop, drop and roll!

OPTIONS
The Options menu will let you save and load games (so you don’t
have to finish the game in a single sitting) and change preferences.
You can also quit back to the Main Menu from the Options menu.
SAVE GAME
When it comes time for you to stop playing, saving your game
will allow you to return later and pick up from where you left off.Saving your game as you are playing is also a very good idea.  If some-thing bad were to happen to you, then if you have a recently savedgame, you can restore from that point without losing a lot of progress.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—33
Figure 4-29:  Another look at the options menu.
SAVE GAME
Clicking this button will display the Save Game menu.  You can save thegame at any time you can access the Options menu (which is pretty muchall the time).  A couple notable exceptions are: Dialogue (if you’re in themiddle of a conversation, you just can’t whip out that save game disk asthat is very impolite you know) and on the World Map.
EXITThis button will exit back to the main menu.  Itwill ask you to confirm this decision.  If youwant to save your game before quitting, thenmake sure you do so before selecting ExitLOAD GAMEThis button willdisplay the LoadGame menu, whichis a good thing ifyou have savedgames.  You canload a game anytime you can save agame.  If you want,you can load thegame you just saved- but that would bea little redundant…PREFERENCESClick this buttonwill display a list ofgame preferences(see page 4—35).If the volume of thegame is too loud,or too quiet, or ifyou want to adjustone of the manygameplay options,select this button.
DONEThis will take you backinto the Fallout world.4

The save game menu is very simple:
You have ten save game slots.  A save game slot will hold one
save game file, so you can save up to ten different locations or posi-tions at a time.  If you have already saved ten games, then you needto overwrite an earlier save game.
We here at Vault-Tec highly suggest that you use more than one
save game slot at a time.  We suggest that you start with slot 1, andwork your way down the list of slots.  When you want to save a gameafter slot 10, start over again at slot 1.
At the start of Fallout, all ten slots are empty.  You can see what
a save game slot contains by clicking on the slot position.  A screen-shot of what you were doing when you saved your game will be dis-played in the upper right-hand corner.  Your description of the gamewill be displayed as well.
To save a game, double-click on the slot you want to use or select
it and click the DONE button.  Type a description that will help youremember what you were doing.  Press ENTER or click the DONEbutton in the description window.  If you change your mind and don’twant to save over this slot, click the CANCEL button.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—34
Figure 4-30:
The SaveGame menu.Use it often.
Figure 4-31: Entering a description for the saved game

LOAD GAME
When it comes time for you to load a previously saved game (see
above), then you need to use the load game menu.
The load game menu is very similar to the save game menu.  A
list of save game slots is displayed on the left-hand side.  A screen-shot is in the upper right-hand corner, and the description of the dis-played save game is below it.
To load a previously saved game, double-click on the appropri-
ate slot or click the slot to highlight it and then press DONE.
If you don’t want to load an old saved game, click on the CAN-
CEL button.
PREFERENCESVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—35
Figure 4-32:
The LoadGame menu.It loads games.
Figure 4-33:
User-selectablePreferencesMenu.4

Preferences are user settings that allow you, the user, to cus-
tomize or control aspects of the game.  If you don’t like the way thosenon-player characters are taunting you during combat, then go rightahead and turn their comments off!  You can do it, we trust you.
You can access the preferences menu from the interface bar
(pressing the O button), or by using the keyboard equivalent (“O”),and selecting Preferences.
Following is the list of preferences.  The underlined option is the
default setting.
Game Difficulty [Easy, No
rmal , Hard]
Controls the difficulty level of reactions and other non-combat
skill rolls.  Negative reaction modifiers are halved, and all non-com-bat rolls are made with a +20% bonus if set to Easy.  If set to Hard,all negative reaction modifiers are increased by 25%, and all non-combat skill rolls are made at -10%.
You can adjust this at any time during the game, and there is no
penalty or reward for using a setting besides normal.
Combat Difficulty [Wimpy, No
rmal , Rough]
Controls the difficulty of the combat.  On Wimpy level, the oppo-
nents have a negative modifier to hit and damage, and use less tar-geted shots.  On Rough level, your opponents will hit more often, domore damage, and use more targeted shots.
There is no penalty for using a lower combat difficulty level.
There is no reward for using a higher difficulty level.  It is strictly apersonal preference.  You can adjust the combat difficulty setting atany time during the game.
Combat Speed [Slider: No
rmal -> Fastest, Player Checkbox]
Controls the animation rate in combat.  When set to Normal, it
works as usual.  Moving the slider towards Fastest, will increase therate at which combat moves, with the exception of the player’sactions, and when a critter targets or attacks the player.  If thePlayer checkbox is marked, it will also speed up the player’s actions,and when the player is targeted.
If combat is moving a little too slow for you, then adjust this set-
ting until you are happy with the speed.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—36

Combat Taunts [On, Off]
This option turns the combat taunt messages on and off.  These
are the messages that non-player characters (everyone except you)say during the middle of combat (you can say whatever you want,just don’t annoy your neighbors - Vault-Tec will not be responsible forany neighborhood complaints).
Combat Messages [Verbo
se, Brief]
When set to Verbose, the combat messages will use the longer,
more detailed messages.  When set to Brief, the combat messageswill be very short, showing only the critical pieces of information.
Target Highlight [On
, Off, Targeting Only]
When On, legal targets are highlighted during combat.  When
Off, they are not.  When set to Targeting Only, the highlights onlyappear when the player is using the targeting cursor.
Violence Level [None, Minimal, Normal, Maximum
Bloo d]
This preference controls the maximum death animation level
shown to the user.  Maximum Blood shows all three levels.  Normalshows up to the second level.  Minimal shows critters falling overwith blood.  None shows the critters falling over without blood.There is no practical difference in the game.  What level the violencemeter is set to is purely personal.
Text Delay [Slider: Slow -> No
rmal -> Faster]
This option will control for how long the floating text and dia-
logue screen messages are displayed.  Slow speed messages are dis-played for twice as long, and Faster messages are displayed for halfas long.
Language Filter [On, Off
]
When this filter is set to On, Fallout will not use as much adult
language.  With the Language Filter set to Off, you will see strongerlanguage used.  There is no practical difference in the game.  Thechoice of having the language filter on is purely personal.
Running [Normal, Al
ways]
If set to Always, the character will run instead of walk if the shift
button is not pressed.  Pressing the shift button will walk the charac-ter instead of running, if Always is selected.  Normal works normally.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—374

Master Audio Volume [Slider: Off -> Quiet -> No rmal -> Loud]
Controls the overall volume of audio.  If set to Off, it overrides
all other audio settings.  The Music, Sound Effects and Speech vol-ume controls will adjust their volume based on the master audio vol-ume control.
Music/Movie Volume [Slider: Off -> Quiet -> No
rmal -> Loud]
Controls the volume of the music and the audio during the cin-
ematic movie sequences.
Sound Effects Volume [Slider: Off -> Quiet -> No rmal -> Loud]
Controls the volume of the sound effects.
Speech Volume [Slider: Off -> Quiet -> No rmal -> Loud]
Controls the volume of the digitized speech.
Brightness Level [Slider: No rmal -> Brighter]
This preference will control the brightness of the screen.  For
some computers, and some monitors, you may need to turn thebrightness level up a couple of notches to see darker screens better.There is a keyboard equivalent to make these changes on the fly.
Mouse Sensitivity [Slider: Slow -> No
rmal -> Faster]
The higher the setting, the faster the mouse will move.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 4—38

Section V.
CONFLICT RESOLUTION
VDSG VTB-001-13-55

GENERAL
At some point during your adventure, diplomacy or stealth
will fail.  The last resort will be combat.  Combat is defined whenyou have an attacker attempting to do damage to a defender.  Itrequires two or more people to have a combat situation.
Combat in Fallout is turn-based.  Generally, you will get a
chance to act.  After your action or actions, the next characterinvolved in combat gets to go.  When all of your opponents or alliesinvolved in this combat have taken their actions, then you getanother chance to act.  This is called a new turn.  This continuesuntil all the combatants are dead, unconscious or fleeing.
Since the rest of the game is real-time (one minute of real
world time equals one minute of game time, unless you perform anaction that takes an extended amount of time, or use the PIPBoyalarm clock to rest), when combat starts you change modes to turn-based.  You will know when this happens when the combat buttonsin the lower right-hand corner of the interface bar are revealed.
When it is your turn the lights around the combat button will
glow bright green.  During your opponents turn, the lights are red.The action points above the active item button on the interface barwill also glow a bright green when it is your turn, red when it isyour opponents turn, and dull green when you are not in combat.
Each combat turn is roughly 5 seconds of game time.  It may
take longer in real time to finish, as you think about and then per-form your actions for that turn.
Combat will often refer to hexes (short for hexagon, or a six-
sided polygon).  A hex is a way of dividing the area of the battle-field into small, manageable chunks.  Each hex in Fallout is onemeter from side to side.  Someone two hexes away would be con-sidered two meters away.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—1
Figure 5-1: The Combat Button.
BEFORE
Not in
combat.
AFTER
In the
middle ofa combatturn, yourmove.
5

STARTING COMBAT
There are two ways to start combat: attack or be attacked.
Combat will often result if you get too close to a hostile critter (like amutated rat) or if you say something that really angers some sentientbeing (like a mutant that you called a rat).
If you want to attack someone with a weapon besides your
hands and feet, you must first equip the weapon into one of the activeitem slots (ITEM 1 and ITEM 2) in the inventory screen.  Left-clickon a weapon with a valid attack type (single, burst, swing, thrust,throw - see below).  The cursor will turn into the targeting cursor andyou can then left-click on an opponent to start the combat.  The turn-based combat system will take over until all of your opponents aredead, unconscious, or fleeing.
People will be ordered in the turn by their Sequence statistic.  If
more characters or monsters enter combat, they will also be placedby their Sequence number.
ACTIONS IN COMBAT
Once you are in a combat turn, you’ll have a limited number of
actions that you can perform.  The number of actions is based on yourAction Point stat.  The more action points (AP) you have, the morethings you can do.  You will “spend” AP every turn, until you have justa few or none left, and then the next person in the combat turn will go.
Action Points. The number of action points your character
has is located above the active item button on the interface bar.  TheAP lights only show the first 10 AP you have.  If you have more than10 AP remaining, they will not be shown.
As you take actions, and spend AP to do those actions, the num-
ber of bright green lights will turn dull green.  The number of brightVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—2
Figure 5-2:  The interface bar, in combat mode.
Shown is the active item button with a weapon.

green lights are your remaining AP.
Different actions cost different amounts of APs.  It costs very lit-
tle to walk one meter, but to walk several meters costs more.Attacking with a knife is faster than aiming with a rifle, so the knifeattack will cost less AP to perform.
Movement.   The number of AP points to move is shown in the
middle of the movement cursor when you pause the cursor for amoment over the destination hex.  If there is a red X in the center ofthe cursor, then you do not have enough AP to move that far, or thereis something (or someone) blocking your access to that hex.
Running in combat has no advantage or penalty.
Reserve Movement. If you hold down the CTRL key while
clicking to move, you will reserve enough action points to perform thecurrent action for the active item.  If you want enough AP left over toshoot your target, but you want to get as close to it as possible (to getthe best possible chance to hit), then hold down the CTRL key whenyou click to move.  Example: You have 9 AP.  Your current weapon isa Colt 6520.  It costs 5 AP to shoot the gun.  If you hold CTRL downwhen you click on a hex that is 8 hexes away, you will only move (9-5) 4 hexes towards the destination hex.  You will have 5 AP remain-ing, just enough to shoot the pistol.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—3Table 5-1   A CTION POINTS
ACTION TO PERFORM BASE AP COST
Walking ..........................................................1 AP per meter (hex)Hand to Hand (HtH) Attack ..............................3 APMelee Weapon Attack ......................................4 AP *Ranged Attack (Single)......................................5 AP *Ranged Attack (Burst)........................................6 AP *Targeted Attack ................................................+1 AP *Reloading Ammo..............................................2 APAccessing Inventory ..........................................4 APOpening a door ..............................................3 APUsing a scenery item ........................................3 AP
*Some weapons cost more or less AP than listed to use.  The number of AP to use an active
item (like a weapon) is always shown in the lower left-hand corner of the active item button.
5

Attacking.   The number of AP required to make an attack will
depend on the attack that you make.  Weapons that are big and bulkywill require more AP to use than a smaller, more agile weapon.
All ranged weapon attacks are assumed to be aimed.
Ammunition is scarce.  Each shot must count.
Targeted shots require more aim time, so they take an addi-
tional AP to perform.
To attack, right-click on the active item button (also called an
active weapon button when you have a weapon in it during combat)to get to the mode that you want to attack in.  Left-click on the but-ton to get a targeting cursor.  Move the targeting cursor over youropponent, and left-click again to attack.
Inventory.   If you press the INV button to access your inven-
tory, it will cost you 4 AP to do so.  If you do not have 4 AP, you can-not get to your inventory.
Once you are in your inventory, you can perform as many
actions as you want.  If you do nothing, it will still cost you the 4 AP.Once the AP are spent, you cannot get them back.
Other Actions.  If you perform any odd actions (like opening
or closing a door, or using a computer), it will cost you 3 AP.
Some skills or actions require so much time to properly use that
you cannot perform them in combat.
Armor Class Bonus.  Any unused AP remaining when you end
your turn will add to your armor class.  Effectively, the less you do ina turn, the more defensive you are and the harder you are to hit.  Ifyou are trying to avoid an opponent, it will often be better to use theaction points to move away from the opponent instead of standingstill and getting the Armor Class bonus.
CHANCE TO HIT
Attacks in combat are not a sure thing.  People are dodging,
your heartbeat is racing, there is often cover or armor to stop theattack, and palms get a little sweaty.  Weapon attacks will often referto a “chance to hit.”  When you move the targeting cursor over youropponent, for example, you will get the chance to hit percentagewhen you hover the cursor for a moment.  The higher this number is,the more likely you will actually be able to hit your opponent with theattack.  This number is a percentage.
For example, if the chance to hit is 63%, then 63 out of 100
times, you should be able to succeed.  A 50% chance to hit means thatVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—4

half of the time you will hit, and half of the time you will miss.
Your chance to hit is based on the appropriate weapon skill and
modified by the range, light level, armor, cover your target has, andif the attack is targeted, the location you are trying to hit.
For ranged weapons, the distance between you and your target
is critical.  The closer you are to the target, the better the chance tohit.  Your Perception will drastically modify the final to hit penalty orbonus for range.  If you are closer than your Perception in meters (8Perception is 7 meters or less, for example), you will actually get abonus to your to hit chance.  If the target is farther away than yourPerception in meters (9 meters or more, according to our other exam-ple), then you will get a penalty on your to hit chance.  If the targetis exactly your Perception away from you, there is no modifier.
If your target is in the dark, they will be harder to see.  Targets
that are hard to see are also harder to hit.  The light level of the tar-get will therefore modify your chance to hit.  If the target is in theshadows, there will be a penalty for attacking it.  Partial darkness isa -10% to hit, medium darkness is a -20% to hit, and full darkness isa -40% to hit penalty.  The light around your character representsVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—5Table 5-2   W EAPON SKILLS
SKILL WEAPONS COVERED
Small Guns ......................................Pistols, SMGs and Rifles
Big Guns ..........................................Heavy Machine-guns,
Flamethrowers and other largesupport weapons
Energy Weapons ..............................Ranged weapons that use
power cells as their ammo type 
Throwing ..........................................Thrown rocks, spears, knives
and grenades 
Melee Weapons ................................Knives, spears, sledgehammers
and other hand to handweapons
Unarmed ..........................................Punching and Kicking attacks
5

your ability to see closer objects better in the dark.  It does not mod-
ify an opponent’s chance to hit you in combat.  Your opponents aresubject to the standard darkness modifiers.
Armor provides protection against the target actually being hit
by deflecting the attack.  Attacks that are deflected (or bounced, forreally heavy armor) do no damage to the target.  The percentage thatthe chance to hit is modified by is called Armor Class (AC).  The ACis subtracted from the chance to hit.  Higher ACs are therefore bet-ter.  Anything over a 20% AC is really good.  See the Armor sectionon page 5—12 for more details.
Cover is considered as any obstacle between you and your tar-
get.  Other people, barrels to duck behind, trees, and walls are allconsidered cover.  Cover will modify the to hit chance as a negativepenalty.  You will never have a better chance to hit your target ifthere is cover between you and it.  The amount of the penaltydepends on the cover.  A barrel may be very little, another person alittle more, and a wall may have a really big modifier.
Targeted attacks are discussed below, but they all have some
sort of negative to hit penalty based on the location being targeted.Trying to hit someone in the eyes is more difficult than attackingtheir left arm (or tentacle, or whatever).
RANGED WEAPONS
Ranged weapons are weapons that can be used in a range of 
1 hex or more.  Ranged weapons have some sort of finite range thatthey can be used up to, but this is often 6-8, 15, 20 or more meters(hexes) away.
Pistols, rifles, SMGs, shotguns, rocket launchers, flame-throw-
ers are all considered ranged weapons.  So are throwing knives,spears and rocks.  If you can attack someone at a range of more than2 hexes, it is considered a ranged weapon.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—6
Figure 5-3:  The active item
button, in Single attack mode.

Single Shot. Some ranged weapons are single shot.  That is,
each attack will only use one round of ammunition or one instance ofthe weapon (in the case of weapons which self-destruct, like agrenade, or physically leave your hand, like a throwing knife).
You will have a single chance to hit with a single shot weapon.  If
you succeed at your skill roll, after modifiers for range, light level, andthe armor of the target, you will hit.  If you fail the roll, you will miss.
Burst.   Burst weapons fire multiple rounds of ammunition
with every attack.  Burst weapons can have a varying rate of fire(ROF).  The higher the ROF, the more shots the burst weapon willuse per attack.
Burst weapons do
have the advantagethat you will get multi-ple chances to hit.Each shot has an indi-vidual chance to hit.Even with a low skill, aburst weapon with ahigh ROF will mostlikely mean that someof the shots will hit.
The other advan-
tage that burstweapons have is a larger area of effect.  A burst weapon is capable ofcovering multiple hexes and hitting several targets at once.  Thehigher the ROF, the more likely multiple targets will be hit during aburst attack.  Your primary target (the person or thing you target)will take the brunt of the burst attack.  Everyone between you andthe target, within a cone that is centred on the target, can possiblybe hit by the burst attack.  Friends, enemies, and non-combatants.  Ifthey are in your way, there is a chance they could be hit.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—7
Figure 5-4:  The active item
button, in Burst attack mode.
Figure 5-5:  An example
of a burst cone of effect.5

If you perform a burst attack on an enemy that is very close to
you, then you will saturate them with bullets instead of doing thewider, spraying affect.
Bursting does have the unfortunate side effect of using a lot of
ammo.
Reloading.   Weapons that have an ammo capacity (like a gun,
but also including any weapons that have fuel or energy require-ments) will need to be reloaded from time to time (more often if youattack more often, or if the weapon is a burst weapon with a highROF).
Reloading can happen one of two ways: you can access invento-
ry, and drag the proper ammunition to the weapon to reload it, or youcan do a reload action from the active item button on the interfacebar.  The first method is slower, but you get to choose the exact ammoloaded.  The second method is a little faster, but if your gun is empty,you get whatever type of ammo is readily available that will fit it.
The green ammo bar on the right side of the active item button
will show the approximate number of rounds or energy remaining inthe active weapon.  Examine the weapon in inventory to get an exactcount.
If you attempt to attack with an empty weapon, you will auto-
matically fail.
Throw.   Some weapons can be thrown.  These weapons have a
range based on your Strength.  Characters with a higher Strengthwill be able to throw the ranged weapon farther.
Grenades are the most typically thrown weapon.  They also
have the nasty ability to detonate even if you miss.  A live grenadehas to land somewhere.
HAND TO HAND COMBAT
The use of melee weapons and unarmed combat is collectively
known as Hand to Hand combat (HtH).  This sort of combat occurs atvery close ranges, from one to two hexes.  Normally you will be adja-cent to your opponent.  This type of combat is fast and deadly, andvery personal.
Melee weapons, like knives and brass knuckles, have the advan-
tage over ranged weapons in that they do not need consumableammunition and they are generally faster to use accurately.
Hand to Hand combat has the disadvantage that your opponent
will always be able to attack you back.  With ranged weapons, youVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—8

can fire from a distance, and if your opponent is not armed with a
ranged weapon, he must run up to you.  HtH combat is a little moredangerous.
Swing.   Most melee weapons can be used in one of two ways,
with Swing being the most typical attack.  Swinging weapons have abase damage range, plus they get a bonus from your Strength.  TheMelee Damage stat will add to the base damage of the weapon.  Thehigher the Melee Damage, the more damage your are assured ofdoing.
Thrust.   Some melee weapons can also be Thrusted.  Thrusting
weapons also get the Melee Damage bonus.  There is no practical dif-ference between Swing and Thrust.
Punching & Kicking. If you are without a melee weapon, you
can always punch and kick.  This type of attack uses your Unarmedcombat skill.  Punching and Kicking attacks always do damage basedon just your Melee Damage.
DAMAGE
Damage is the result of a successful combat attack.  The more
damage you do, the more likely your opponent will be killed, knockedunconscious, or otherwise put out of the fight.
Hit Points.   Basic damage is recorded in Hit Points (HP).  The
more HP you have, the more damage you can take in combat.  Themore HP you do with an attack, the better that attack was.
When your HP reach zero (0), you die.
Targeted Shots. Targeted shots are attacks that are aimed at
a specific location on your opponent.  They are harder to do (result-ing in a negative modifier to your chance to hit), but can potentiallydo much more damage and they are more likely to result in a criticalhit (see page 5—11).VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—9
Figure 5-6:  The active item
button, in Targeted shot mode.5

If a weapon is capable of making a targeted shot, it will have a
different mode on the active weapon button.  Right-click on theweapon in the active item button to cycle through the various modes.When you see the target in the lower right-hand corner, then whenyou attack it will be a targeted shot.
Burst weapons or weapons that cause explosive damage cannot
make targeted shots.  Most melee weapons can make them.  The tar-get icon in the lower right-hand corner will always be displayed forweapons capable of targeted shots.
Once you have selected the targeted shot mode on the weapon,
and the little target is in the lower right-hand corner, you will get ared target cursor when you left-click on the active weapon button.
Left-click on a target, as if you were attacking them normally, and
you will get a target shot selection screen, as shown in Figure 5-7. Awireframe will represent the target. The different areas that youcan attack will be displayed on the left and right sides.  The numbernext to the location is the final to hit chance that you have forattacking that specific location.  To hit chances of “—” have nochance to hit.
Click on a location name to attempt the attack.  Press the CAN-
CEL button to cancel the attack (in case the to hit chances were toolow, for example).
Targeted shots have a higher chance of scoring a critical hit.
The more difficult the location was to hit, the better the chance it willdo a critical hit.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—10
Figure 5-7: A
targeted shotinterface screen,showing thewireframe ofyour opponent.

Critical Hits. Some attacks are just so good that they cause
extra damage or have some nasty effect on your target.  These arecalled critical hits.  Your chance to have a critical hit is based on yourcritical chance, and whether or not you made a targeted shot.Targeted shots will do more critical hits than normal shots.
A higher skill will give you a better chance to make a critical hit.Some common critical hit effects:
Doing extra damage (x1.5, x2, or even x3)
Crippling a limb (with a targeted shot)
Ignoring the armor of your targetUnconsciousnessKnocking the target over
Other effects are possible.  The type of effects that will occur
depend on the target.
Critical Failures. With every good thing must come a bad
thing.  Critical Failures are the opposite of the nice critical hits.Critical failures mean that something bad has happened to theattacker, which can include you.
Trying to make a difficult attack with a low to hit chance will
increase the odds that you will have a critical failure.  Taking theJinxed trait means that everyone, including yourself, will have morecritical failures.
The type of critical failure that you have depends on the weapon
(or lack thereof) you attack with.
Some common critical failure effects include:
Running out of ammoJamming your gunLosing APDropping your weaponYour weapon may explode (only likely with explosives and
energy weapons)Missing your target and hitting someone else
There are other effects.  Trial and error will take on a whole new
meaning.
Poison. Poison is a nasty type of attack.  It does damage over
longer period of time.  So instead of taking 4 points of damage froma knife, you could take 4 points of damage immediately from a poi-soned knife, and then 10 points of damage over the next ten minutes.The more poison you are affected by, the longer you will take damagefrom poison.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—11
5

Fortunately, poison runs out of steam.  The poison will weaken
over the same period of time.  At first, you will take damage fre-quently from the poison.  As time goes on, the period between dam-age will lengthen.  Eventually, the poison will vanish.
If you can survive long enough, you can escape the clutches of
evil poison.
Radiation.  Radiation is an insidious, invisible attack.
Radiation causes damage to the cells of the target.  Dangerous levelsof Radiation are left behind in craters from nuclear bomb attacks, forexample.  Even after hundreds of years, dirty bombs can create haz-ardous radiation dangers.
The effect of Radiation is based on the total amount of rems, a
count of the amount of radiation you have been exposed to.  The high-er your rem total, the more likely you are going to suffer ill effects.
A rem count of over 100 is dangerous.If you rem count is over 1,000 it is most likely fatal.Radiation will do damage to your hit points, and even to your
statistics.
Normal armor does not stop radiation damage.  Chems, such as
Rad-X and RadAway, can protect against the ill powers of radiation.
Unconsciousness.   Some attacks, especially critical hits to the
head, will cause unconsciousness.  During this time, the person cando nothing.  The amount of time the affected person will be knockedout is dependent on their Endurance.  The higher their Endurance,the shorter they will remain unconscious.
Death.   There are two ways to die: lose all your hit points or
fall unconscious with remaining hostile creatures around you.
Both are bad ideas.
ARMOR
Fortunately, armor can protect against damage.  Armor is a pro-
tective apparel worn to defend against attacks and damage.  Betterarmor can protect against bigger attacks.
There are three factors that determine the quality of armor.
Armor Class.  The first function of armor is to prevent the
wearer from being hit by the attack.  This is known as Armor Class(or AC).  The higher the AC, the better the armor.  The AC subtractsfrom the to hit chance of the attacker.  Example: you are wearinglight leather armor, with an AC of 15%.  Your attacker has a base toVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—12

hit chance of 50% (assuming all the other modifiers have been taken
into account).  His final to hit chance is only (50% - 15%) 35%.
Damage Threshold.   The second step is blocking the damag-
ing energy of the attack.  This is known as the Damage Threshold (orDT).  The DT is subtracted from the hit point damage of the attack.Example: Assume the above attacker succeeds.  His attack does 20points of damage (ouch!).  You have a DT of 4.  The first four pointsof his attack are stopped, with only 16 (still ouch!) getting throughthe first phase of your armor.
Damage Resistance.  After the DT, the Damage Resistance
(or DR) of your armor takes over.  This represents the ability of armorto slow down and disperse the damaging energy.  DR is expressed asa percentage.  This is the percent of the remaining damage that isnullified.  Example: The 16 points from the above attack are stillcoming.  You have a DR of 20%.  The damage is reduced by (16 x .2)3.2 points of damage (round down), or 3 points.  The final attack doesonly 13 points of damage, which is a heck of lot better than the ini-tial 20 points.
Armor is always expressed as:  Armor Class, DT/DR.
ENDING COMBAT
At some point combat
must end.  Hopefully, youwill be on the victoriousside.  If all the combat-ants on one side aredead, unconscious, orhave fled, the combatwill end.
If there are no more
hostile creatures remain-ing, combat will endautomatically at the endof your turn.  If you wantto end combat early, trythe END COMBAT but-ton on the interface bar.
If hostile creatures
are nearby, you cannotend combat.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—13
Don’t let this happen to you!  Proper
weapon maintenance will stop over95% of all critical failures!5

EQUIPMENT
Vault-13 comes prepared with the latest in survival equipment.
The items in your storage containers will last 1,000 people over 10years in comfortable and modern surroundings.  When it is time toleave the Vault, and return to rebuild America, your friends at Vault-Tec have provided you with everything that you will need.
We have ensured that all of your rebuilding needs will be cov-
ered//s: Yeah, right.  Who wrote this?  What budget did they get?  Wealready used most of the equipment on failed attempts to contact anoutside civilization.  And we’ve been in here a lot longer than tenyears.  We have little left to give you, but we will give you what wecan.  -O//
undergone extensive testing to make sure the equipment is reliable. 
A reminder: You can only carry an amount of equipment equal to
your carry weight.  Anything over that amount must be left behind.
You can get specific information about the items in your inven-
tory by doing an Examine on a item in your inventory list.  The infor-mation will be displayed in the inventory display window.  If youequip armor and weapons, the character information in the displaywindow will give you additional information.
There are six different types of equipment:
Weapons (things that hurt people)
Ammo (things that go in things that hurt people)
Armor (things that help people not get hurt)
Containers (things that hold other things)
Chems (things that you take)
Miscellaneous (things that do other stuff)
All items have the following in common:
Weight (how much things weigh, in pounds).   The weight of the
item will affect your ability to carry equipment.  You can carry a larg-er amount of lighter items than heavier items.  When you examinean item, it will tell you the weight for one instance of that item.  Ifyou carry multiple items of the same type, you need to multiply thenumber of items by the weight to determine the total weight of itemsin that stack.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—14-O
Yeah, right.  Who wrote this?  What budget did they
get?  We already used most of the equipment on
failed attempts to contact an outside civilization.
And we’ve been in here a lot longer than ten years.
We have little left to give you, but we will give you   
what we can.  

Size (how big or small things are).   The size of the item will
affect how many items a container can hold, and how difficult it willbe for someone to steal this item from you.  Larger items are moredifficult to steal.  Generally, items that are heavy, are larger in size.This is not always the case.
Cost (how much things are worth, in money).   More valuable
items are worth more money.  We don’t know what kind of monetarysystem will exist after a nuclear war, but bartering is most likely toexist.  In this case, items necessary to survival will probably carry alarger price tag than fancy, expensive, but unnecessary items.
Your bartering skill will adjust the value of an item.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—15EQUIPMENT LIST
WEAPONS
BRASS KNUCKLES
Brass Knuckles are a melee weapon that use your unarmed skill.They will help in hand-to-hand combat when punching.  Besidesgiving your hand a little more protection, they will increase theamount of damage you do with a punch.  And they look cool.
RIFLE
A longer ranged, and more powerful, firearm.  The Rangemaster isyour basic, solid rifle.  It uses the .223 caliber rifle round, a standardfor over 110 years.  The .223, combined with a 1:10” twist, givesgood accuracy at range and solid knockdown capability.
PISTOL
This is your basic ranged weapon.  The 10mm round packs agoodly punch, and the Colt pistol is a fine example ofworkmanship and quality.  It is a single shot weapon only,meaning that every time you pull the trigger, you will fire one,and only one, round of ammunition.  The 6520 has no problemfeeding hollowpoint ammunition for small game hunting, orarmor piercing rounds for larger, bipedal game.
CLUB
This police baton will help subdue your opponents.  You canswing or thrust it, as you desire.  The baton will focus yourstrength, doing more damage than your own hands.  Not muchmore, but more…
ICON DESCRIPTION
5

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—16EQUIPMENT LIST
WEAPONS continued
GRENADE
The fragmentation grenade is extremely useful as a defensiveweapon.  A small, but concentrated, explosive charge connected toa contact fuze will spread over 1,000 metal fragments over a 2.5meter radius area.  The small explosion area means that thesegrenades can be used at a closer range than ever before, withoutpossible harm to the user.
SLEDGEHAMMER
While many would consider a Sledgehammer to be an excellenttool, but a  poor self-defence weapon, the latest designs aremade with lightweight but extremely strong materials.  Thesledgehammer is a massive weapon, that in the hands of a strongwielder, can knock foes off their feet.
SPEAR
A razor-tipped spear can be thrown for several meters (more
depending on your strength), or used in hand-to-hand combat,making this a good balance between ranged and melee weapons.While it is not the best tactical sense to throw your only weapon atyour opponent, if you keep a sidearm or other small weapon readilyavailable, the spear can be a good first attack.
KNIFE
Vault-Tec knives are formed from the hardest steel alloys known toman!  The knife is a superb tool, capable of performing manymundane tasks, as well as being a good melee weapon.  Theknife point and edge will act as a force multiplier, increasing theamount of damage your Strength can do.  Not as good as a gun,but better than most other small melee weapons.  This knife is notbalanced or designed for throwing, as some others are.
SMG
One of the finest weapons in the world.  The H&K MP9 is a solidsubmachinegun, capable of single or burst mode attacks.  Thesingle shot is acceptable, comparable to the 6520 pistol, but theburst mode is spectacular!  The MP9 is easy to control, and spews10mm death like no other firearm in it’s size category.
ICON DESCRIPTION

ARMORVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—17EQUIPMENT LIST
AMMO
.223 FMJ
Rifle caliber ammunition.  The FMJ stands for Full-Metal Jacket,which describes the bullet that is used in the round of ammo.  AFMJ bullet is very tough, and has pretty good penetration withoutsacrificing good expansion.  In other words, it‘s an average round.
COMBAT ARMOR
Combat Armor is advanced personal armor for the 22nd centurypolice officer or military grunt.  This is about the best armor a VaultDweller is likely to see in their lifetime.  Combat Armor is highlyeffective against most types of damage, is light weight (for it’sprotective value), and is, unfortunately, not available without a specialpermit.  Interested parties should contact the BADTFL office near them.
LEATHER ARMOR
The original Leather Armor was designed for Motorcycle Football andother dangerous contact sports.  It is likely that the simple constructiontechniques required to produce armor of this design will make it apopular choice following a nuclear disaster.  It provides moderateprotection, and the light construction makes it easier to dodge attackswhile worn.  Unfortunately, it provides little to no protection againstexplosions or plasma attacks.
10mm JHP
This is another version of the 10mm, but in JHP or Jacketed HollowPoint.  Hollow Point ammunition is designed to expand to as large ofa size as possible to translate the most energy to the target.Unfortunately, if the target is wearing armor, most of the energy issplatted against the armor and little of it will actually affect the target.
10mm AP
The 10mm caliber ammo is designed for pistol or submachinegunsize firearms.  The AP suffix denotes the round is Armor Piercing.AP rounds have excellent penetration, but poor expansion.  Theywill not be as affected by armor as a normal round, but do lessdamage after armor to the target.
ICON DESCRIPTION
5

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—18EQUIPMENT LIST
ARMOR continued
LEATHER JACKET
What’s the point of wearing armor if you can’t look good?  TheLeather Jacket is a toned down version of Leather Armor,providing minimal protection while not sacrificing any dodgingcapability.  Stylish, too.  Unfortunately, poor ventilation and theblack leather make this a very hot armor to wear under thescorching desert sun.
RAD-X
Rad-X is a preventive medication.  Take Rad-X before exposureto radiation, and the total amount of radiation you receive willbe reduced.  Rad-X bolsters your bodies own RadiationResistance.  The stronger you are to start with, the more effectiveRad-X will be.
RADAWAY
If you have been exposed to large amounts of radiation, then useRadAway to remove the radiation from your system.  It won’t feelgood, but better a headache and some stomach problems for acouple of days than the long term effects of nuclear radiation!RadAway takes a little while to work.
BACKPACK
A backpack will store items for you in one convenient location.Items have two features: size and weight.  A backpack will storeany number of items that total less than around 40 lbs., andhave a combined size that will fit in the backpack.  Severalreally large items (like suits of armor) will not fit in a normalbackpack, but  lots of small items (like ammo, or grenades) willfit just fine.
Why use a backpack?  To keep your inventory organized.
ICON DESCRIPTION
CONTAINERS
CHEMS

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—19MISCELLANEOUSEQUIPMENT LIST
CHEMS continued
STIMPAK
A stimpak (short for Stimulation Delivery Package) contains manyhealing chems.  A soup of healing medication, if you will.  Byinjecting the Stimpak, you drastically increase your ownrecuperative functions and restore lost hit points almost instantly.
DOCTOR’S BAG
A Doctor’s Bag includes all the items necessary to perform most tasksrequired by the Doctor skill.  Using this item will automatically performthe Doctor skill task, but at a higher percentage chance of success (theproper tools help ensure a higher success rate).  A Doctor’s Bag doesnot contain unlimited supplies and will eventually run out.
DYNAMITE
An explosive.  Use the dynamite to set the timer.  After the timerexpires, the dynamite will explode.  Your Traps skill will determine ifyou set the timer properly.  In Fallout, explosives are generally lowerpowered then you would expect.  But don’t stand next to a charge ofdynamite when it goes off.
SUPER STIMPAK
The Super Stimpak contains more drastic chems, increasing thehealing effect at the cost of eventual damage to the very tissue itheals!  A larger cousin to the Stimpak, the Super Stim will healmore damage.  It will, however, cause a small amount of hit pointloss after a period of time.  You should be aware of this function,and prepare for it.  But nothing works like a Super Stim whentime is short, and danger grave.
FIRST AID KIT
Similar in nature to the Doctor’s Bag, the first aid kit (FAK) has itemsfor the use of the first aid skill.  Using the FAK on a hurt subject willimprove the successful chance of using the skill of First Aid.  Also, likethe Bag, the FAK contains a limited amount of healing items,bandages, and so on.  After multiple uses, it will be eliminated.
ICON DESCRIPTION
5

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—20EQUIPMENT LIST
MISCELLANEOUS continued
FLARE
The flare can be used to create a field of light for a period oftime.  Only really useable during the night, or in darknessconditions, the flare can be a successful tool in exploration.Light makes it easier to see people and things.
MOTION SENSOR
When used in conjunction with the PIPBoy 2000 AutoMapfeature, the motion sensor will display living and moving critterson the map.  The motion sensor must be placed in an activeitem slot to function correctly.  Use the motion sensor to scoutthe area ahead.
THT TAPES (Holotapes)
THT Tapes can store an incredible amount of data, some can hold
as much as 256k.  The standard tape holds 64k, with the middlemodel holding an average of 128k (barring any bad inches oftape).  THT Tapes are based on Tape Holography technology,storing their information safely for extended periods of time.  Usethe THT Tape to add it’s information to a compatible reader, in yourcase - the PIPBoy 2000.
LOCKPICKS
An unauthorised item for general vault personnel use.  Lockpicksare only to be used in emergencies requiring the opening ofdoors or locked containers when the proper key is unavailable.The proper use of the lockpick item will increase the successfulchance of using the Lockpick skill.
GEIGER COUNTER
A geiger counter is a device for the measurement of radiation.If you place the counter in one of your active item slots, you willhave advance warning about radiation.  Actively using thecounter will give you important detailed information about yourpersonal radiation count.
ICON DESCRIPTION

EXPERIENCE
As your character survives in the hostile environments, and
succeeds at the tasks ahead, you will gain experience.  In turn, expe-rience will improve your character, increase your character level,allowing you to spend points on skills, and eventually, pick a Perk.
Experience is rated in Experience Points (often abbreviated
XP).  The more difficult the task you solve, or the more difficult thecritter you put down, the more experience points you earn.
When you achieve a set number of XP, you gain a level.  When
you gain a character level, which is a generalized measure of howmuch experience you have gained and how capable your character is,you gain the following:
Additional Hit Points, equal to 1/3 EnduranceMore Skill Points, equal to 5 + Intelligence x 2 
(see page 5—22)
Every three levels, you gain one Perk (see page 5—23)
The maximum level a character can achieve is level 21.  Here is
a list of the levels, and how much XP is required to gain that level.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—21Table 5-3   E XPERIENCE TABLE
LEVEL XP REQUIRED TITLE
1 ..........................0..........................Vault-dweller
2....................1,000..........................Vault Scion3....................3,000..........................Vault Veteran4....................6,000..........................Vault Elite5..................10,000..........................Wanderer6..................15,000..........................Desert Wanderer7..................21,000..........................Wanderer of the Wastes8..................28,000..........................Elite Wanderer9..................36,000..........................Strider10................45,000..........................Desert Strider11................55,000..........................Strider of the Wastes
5

As you can see, it takes a slightly larger amount of XP to
advance from the lower levels to the higher levels.  You have to learnmore to achieve the same amount of growth.
SKILL POINTS
When you earn more skill points, you can increase your skills by
spending those points on a skill.  Every skill point is worth an addi-tional +1% to a normal skill, and +2% to a Tag skill.
You can spend skill points whenever you wish, and on whatever
skill you want to increase.  Storing skill points is a possible strategy,but then you effectively lose them by not gaining their benefit untilyou spend them.
You earn skill points by going up a level.  When you go from
level 1 to level 2, you will gain some skill points.  The number of skillpoints you gain depends on your character.  Every level will get you5 + Intelligence x 2 skill points.  Average characters will gain 15 skillpoints a level, or +15% to normal skills or +30% to just Tag skills, orsome combination between the two types of skills.
To spend skill points, go to the character screen.  The number of
skill points is listed above the information card.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—22Table 5-3   E XPERIENCE TABLE Continued
LEVEL XP REQUIRED TITLE
12................66,000..........................Strider Elite
13................78,000..........................Vault Hero14................91,000..........................Wandering Hero15..............105,000..........................Striding Hero16..............120,000..........................Hero of the Desert17..............136,000..........................Hero of the Wastes18..............153,000..........................Hero of the Glowing Lands19..............171,000..........................Paragon20..............190,000..........................Living Legend21..............210,000..........................Last, Best Hope of Humanity

Click on the skill name of the skill you want to spend some
points on.  The skill will highlight, and the pointer on the right-handside of the skill column will jump to the skill level.  You can spendpoints by clicking on the plus sign on the pointer.  If you change yourmind, and spend too many points, you can click on the minus sign(but you can’t reduce your skill below the point where you startedspending skill points, naturally).  Until you actually hit the DONEbutton and return to the game, you can make as many adjustmentsas you wish.  If you click on the CANCEL button, it will restore yourcharacter to the state you were in before making any changes.
You can spend as many skill points as you have in the skill point
pool.  Once you are out, you won’t get any more skill points until youget another level.
The maximum skill level is 200%.  If you have 200% in a skill,
you cannot add more points to that skill.
PERKS
Besides skills, it is possible for experience to reward you in
another manner - Perks.  You get one Perk every three levels (level 3,6, 9, 12, 15, 18, and 21), unless you have the Skilled trait (every fourlevels; level 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20).  A Perk is a new ability.  Perks arebased on your character, and the list of Perks that you can choosefrom is based on what level, statistics, and skills your character has.
You will have the opportunity to pick a Perk when you enter the
character screen after achieving a level that grants you a Perk.  Youcan choose not to pick a Perk, but if you don’t select one before thenext Perk-granting level, you lose it.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—23
Figure 5-8:
Here are someskill points tospend.
5

Some Perks can be taken multiple times.  These Perks have
ranks, or perk levels.  Every additional rank will increase the powerof the Perk.
Perks also have requirements.  Your character must have the
minimum requirements, or greater, to be able to take the Perk.  Youmust meet all the requirements.  Some Perks have no requirements.
All Perks are not available at the first level Perks are offered.
These Perks have a minimum level before they can be taken.
THE LIST OF PERKS
Action Boy
Each level of Action Boy (insert Girl if you wish) will give you an
additional AP to spend every combat turn.  You can use these gener-ic APs on any task.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ..............5 Agility, Level 12
Animal Friend
Animals will not attack one of their friends, unless the animal
is threatened or attacked first.  Exactly what an animal is in thisworld is open to debate.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................5 Intelligence, 25% Outdoorsman,
Level 9VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—24
Figure 5-9:  Picking a Perk for a better future!

Awareness
You are more likely to notice details.  Buying one level of
Awareness will give more detailed information when you perform anExamine.  Each level of Awareness will add to your Perception forpurposes of Examines.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................5 Perception, Level 3
Better Criticals
The critical hits you cause in combat are more devastating.  You
gain a 20% bonus on the critical hit table, almost ensuring that moredamage will be done.  This does not affect the chance to cause a crit-ical hit.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................6 Perception, 6 Luck, 4 Agility, Level 9
Bonus HtH Attacks
You have learned the secret arts of the East, or you just punch
faster.  In any case, your hand-to-hand attacks cost 1 AP less to per-form.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................6 Agility, Level 6
Bonus HtH Damage
Experience in unarmed combat has given you the edge when it
comes to damage.  You cause +2 points of damage with punches andkicks for each level of this Perk.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Agility, 6 Strength, Level 3
Bonus Move
For each level of Bonus Move, you get 2 free APs each turn that
can only be used for movement.  In other words, you can move 2 freehexes each turn for each level of this Perk.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................5 Agility, Level 6VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—255

Bonus Ranged Damage
Your training in firearms and other ranged weapons has made
you more deadly in ranged combat.  For each level of this Perk, youdo +2 points of damage with ranged weapons.
Number of Ranks ..........2
Requirements ................6 Agility, 6 Luck, Level 6
Bonus Rate of Fire
This Perk allows you to pull the trigger a little more faster, and
still remain as accurate as before.  Each ranged weapon attack costs1 AP less to perform.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................7 Agility, 6 Intelligence, 4 Perception,
Level 9
Cult of Personality
Your reputation is always positive to people.  Without this Perk,
a large negative reputation would have a bad effect on good naturedpeople.  Works with a good rep and bad people, too.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................10 Charisma, Level 12
Dodger
You are less likely to be hit in combat, if you have this Perk.
Every level will add +5% to your Armor Class, in addition to the ACbonus from any worn armor.
Number of Ranks ..........2
Requirements ................4 Agility, Level 9
Earlier Sequence
You are more likely to move before your opponents in combat,
since your Sequence is +2 for each level of this Perk.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Perception, Level 3
Educated
Each level of Educated will add +2 skill points when you gain a
new experience level.  This Perk works best when purchased early inyour adventure.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Intelligence, Level 6VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—26

Empathy
You have studied other human beings, giving you the inside
knowledge of their emotional reaction to you.  You will see the reac-tion level of the person you are talking to, when involved in an in-depth conversation.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................7 Perception, 5 Intelligence, Level 6
Explorer
The mark of the Explorer is to search out new and interesting
locations.  With this Perk, you have a greater chance of finding spe-cial places or peoples.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirement ..................None, Level 9
Faster Healing
With each level of this Perk, you will get a +1 bonus to your
Healing Rate.  Thus you heal faster.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Endurance, Level 3
Flower Child
With this Perk, you are much less likely to be addicted to chems
(50% less likely, actually), and you suffer half the withdrawal time ofa normal person.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................5 Endurance, Level 9
Fortune Finder
You have the talent of finding money.  You will find additional
money in random encounters in the desert.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................8 Luck, Level 6
Friendly Foe
Characters that are part of your team are highlighted green in
combat instead of red, if you have this Perk.  Red highlighted char-acters may still be non-hostile towards you.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................4 Perception, Level 6VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—275

Ghost
When the sun goes down, or you are in a poorly lit area, you
move like a Ghost with this Perk.  Your Sneak skill is enhanced +20%during darkness conditions.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................60% Sneak, Level 6
Healer
The healing of bodies comes easier to you with this Perk.  Each
level will add 2-5 more hit points healed when using the First Aid orDoctor skills.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................7 Perception, 6 Agility, 5 Intelligence, 
40% First Aid, Level 3
Heave Ho!
Each level of the Heave Ho! Perk will give your thrown weapons
an additional +2 Strength for purposes of determining range only.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................Level 6
Lifegiver
With each level of this Perk, you gain an additional 4 Hit Points.
This may not seem like a lot, but every little bit helps.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................4 Endurance, Level 12
Master Thief
A Master Thief has a one-time bonus of +10% to the Sneak,
Lockpick, Steal and Traps skills.  Rob from the rich, and give to you.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................Level 12
Master Trader
You have mastered one aspect of bartering - the ability to buy
goods far cheaper than a normal person.  With this Perk, you get a25% discount when purchasing items from a store or another trader.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................7 Charisma, 60% Barter, Level 9VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—28

Medic
The Medic Perk will give you a one-time bonus of +20% to the
First Aid and Doctor skills.  Healing skills are a good thing.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................Level 12
Mental Block
Mental Block is the ability to tune out any outside mental inter-
ference.  You must have learned this talent from a passing guru, orfrom a really late night at a bar.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................Level 15
More Criticals
You are more likely to cause Critical Hits in combat if you have
this Perk.  Each level of More Criticals will get you a +5% chance tocause a critical hit.  This is a good thing.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Luck, Level 6
Mr. Fixit
This Perk will give you a one-time bonus of +20% to the Repair
and Science skills.  A little late night cramming never hurt anybody,especially you.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................None, Level 12
Mutate!
The radiation of the wasteland has changed you!  One of your
Traits has mutated into something else...
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................Level 9
Mysterious Stranger
With this Perk, you have gained the attention of a Mysterious
Stranger, who will appear to help you from time to time.  If your allyis lost in combat, do not expect him or her to be replaced.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................7 Luck, Level 6VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—295

Night Vision
With the Night Vision Perk, you can see in the dark better.
Each level of this Perk will reduce the overall darkness level by 10%.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Perception, Level 3
Pathfinder
The Pathfinder is better able to find the shortest route.  With
this Perk, your travel time on the World Map is reduced by 25% foreach level.
Number of Ranks ..........2
Requirements ................6 Endurance, 40% Outdoorsman,
Level 6
Pickpocket
You are much more adept at Stealing than the normal crook.
You can Steal with the best of them, because with this Perk, youignore size and facing modifiers, when stealing from a person.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................8 Agility, 80% Steal, Level 9
Presence
You command attention by just walking into a room.  The ini-
tial reaction of another person is improved by 10% for each level ofthis Perk.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Charisma, Level 3
Quick Pockets
You have learned to better store your equipment on your person.
With each level of this Perk, the AP cost to access Inventory in com-bat is reduced by one.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................5 Agility, Level 3
Rad Resistance
You are better able to avoid radiation, and the bad effects radi-
ation causes.  Each level of this Perk will improve your RadiationResistance by 10%.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Endurance, 4 Intelligence, Level 6VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—30

Ranger
You are better able to avoid unwanted attention while traveling
through the wasteland.  Your chance of a hostile random encounter islowered by each level of this Perk.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Perception, Level 6
Scout
You have improved your ability to see distant locations,
increasing the size of explorations on the World Map by one squarein each direction.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................8 Perception, Level 3
Scrounger
You can find more ammo than the normal post-holocaust sur-
vivor.  This Perk will double the amount of ammo found in randomencounters.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................8 Luck, Level 9
Sharpshooter
The talent of hitting things at longer distances.  You get a +2
bonus, for each level of this Perk, to Perception for the purposes ofdetermining range modifiers.  It's easier than ever to kill at longrange!
Number of Ranks ..........2
Requirements ................7 Perception, 6 Intelligence, Level 6
Silent Death
While Sneaking, if you hit a critter in the back, you will cause
double damage using a HtH attack.  Silent Death is that kind of Perk.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................10 Agility, 80% Sneak, Level 18
Silent Running
With this Perk, you now have the ability to move quickly and
still remain quiet.  You can Sneak, and run at the same time.Without this Perk, you would automatically stop Sneaking if you ran.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................6 Agility, 50% Sneak, Level 6VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—315

Slayer
The Slayer walks the earth!  In hand-to-hand combat, all of your
hits are upgraded to critical hits - causing destruction and mayhem.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................8 Agility, 8 Strength, 80% Unarmed,
Level 18
Smooth Talker
A Smooth Talker has learned to increase their options in dia-
logue, without understanding what they are talking about.  Eachlevel of this Perk will increase your Intelligence by one, for purposesof dialogue only.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................4 Intelligence, Level 3
Snakeater
Yum!  Tastes like chicken.  You have gained an immunity to poi-
son, resulting in a +25% to your Poison Resistance.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................3 Endurance, Level 6
Sniper
You have mastered the firearm as a source of pain.  With this Perk,
any successful hit in combat with a ranged weapon will be upgradedto a critical hit if you also make a Luck roll.
Number of Ranks ............1Requirements ..................8 Agility, 8 Perception, 
80% Small Guns, Level 18
Speaker
Being a Speaker means that you have a one-time bonus of
+20% to the Speech and Barter skills.  From the mouth of babes andall that.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................None, Level 12
Strong Back
AKA Mule.  You can carry an additional 50 lbs. of equipment for
each level of this Perk.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Strength, 6 Endurance, Level 3VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—32

Survivalist
You are a master of the outdoors.  This Perk confers the ability
to survive in hostile environments.  You get a +20% bonus toOutdoorsman for survival purposes, for each level of this Perk.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Endurance, 6 Intelligence, 
40% Outdoorsman, Level 3
Swift Learner
You are indeed a Swift Learner with this Perk, as each level will
give you an additional +5% bonus whenever you earn experiencepoints.  Best purchased at an early level.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................4 Intelligence, Level 3
Tag!
Your skills have improved to the point where you can pick an
additional Tag Skill, increasing that skill by +20% immediately and2% per skill point spent.
Number of Ranks ..........1
Requirements ................Level 12
Toughness
When you are tough, you take less damage.  Each level of this
Perk will add +10% to your general damage resistance.
Number of Ranks ..........3
Requirements ................6 Endurance, 6 Luck, Level 3VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—335

When the All Clear sounds on your radio, you don't want
to be caught without...
THE GARDEN OF EDEN 
CREATION KIT!!VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED 5—34
1A condensed version is available on three handy holodiscs
2Not suitable for children under the age of three.  A different toy is available for younger children.The kit includes: 
Base Replicator Unit- replicates food
and basic items needed for buildingyour new world. Just add water!(powered by cold fusion)
Holodisc Reader with Library-
includes selections from the Libraryof Congress, complete set ofencyclopedias, and other life saving information, all contained on four-hundred and sixty handy holodiscs!
1
and... 
A Miniature Pen Flashlight!2Future-Tec, a division of Vault-Tec, presents the following
advertisement for your enjoyment!
4 out of 5 nuclear scientists recommend the Garden ofCreation Kit over the other leading survival kits!

AAPPENDICES
VDSG VTB-001-13-ARESTRICTED
RESTRICTED

APPENDIX 1: HINTS & TIPS
Here are some hints and tips to help you in your quest to save
Vault-13.  Warning!!  There are some spoilers in the list below.  If youdon’t want to spoil any part of the Fallout adventure, don’t read!Most of the tips are general hints that will be familiar to experiencedadventurers.
Starting Out
When you start out, remember to equip your character with the
best possible equipment as soon as possible.  Strip your fallen foes,barter the loot away and steal (if you think you can get away with it,and are willing to live with the consequences of your actions).
Save Often
You have ten save game slots.  Use them well.  Before you get to
a new location, save your game.  Before entering a dangerous lookingbuilding, save your game.  Before talking to an important lookingNPC, save your game.  And use all of your save game slots.  Don’tkeep saving over slot 1.  If something goes drastically wrong, it’s bet-ter to be able to move a couple of saved games back and restore fromthere instead of having to start over from the very beginning.
Be Nice to People
More often than not, a good reaction will help you.  That’s not to
say that going the route of a heavy, or kicking some poor loser intothe dirt won’t help, but a few kind words and deeds will help you outin the long run.
Punch People in the Nose
If you can’t get your way, then learn how to force your opinion
down their throat (with a 10mm if necessary).  Words are nice, butyou don’t have a whole lot of time, and it might be easier to be thebad guy occasionally to get what you want.  A little badness everynow and then won’t hurt you too much.
Time!
Remember that you are on the clock.  The Vault is dying of
thirst, and they have entrusted you with their lives.  Don’t let themdown.  Solving the water-chip adventure sooner than later will letVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—1A

you explore more easily and without as much pressure.  Don’t spend
too much time diddling around.  The Fallout world is advancing.Your actions will change the course the world will follow, but theworld will continue to move ahead without you.
Save! Save! Save!
Did we mention to save your game?  Fallout combat is deadly.
Getting shot in the eye is no fun, and many Fallout combats willresult in painful injuries.  Can you afford to restart from an old savedgame, and make up lost ground?  No!  Save your game!
Where do I go from here?
If you are having a lot of difficulty determining what to do next,
follow these steps:
(a) Talk to people - many people will give you clues to new loca-
tions or places to go.
(b) Explore the world - the Fallout world is southern
California, so go to where there is a city and look for it onthe world map.  Also make sure to stop at every green-cir-cle area - that means it is an important location.  The extradistance you can see as you travel will give you a betterchance of finding these locations.
(c) The Overseer - if you are completely stuck, try going back
to the Overseer, he might have new information for you.Save your game where you are at (there is that Save wordagain), and then make the long journey back to the Vault.Talk to the Overseer.  If the trip was for nothing, restoreyour previously saved game and look elsewhere.  That wayyou don’t waste any time.
Specialize
For the first couple of levels, spend your skill points in two or
three skills.  Master a small set of skills before attempting to masterthem all.  Spend your skill points as soon as you gain a level.  Whenyou create a character, try to make it a theme character. (A thief, adiplomat and a warrior were the three themes we chose; can youthink of any others?).  Pick Tag skills that will give you an advantage.If you know that you are going to spend a lot of skill points for a par-ticular skill, make that skill a Tag skill.  The 2% for every 1 skillpoint is a major advantage.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—2

Generalize
After about level 4 or 5, be sure to spread those skill points out
a little bit more.  All the skills are important in their own ways.Obviously, if you are a combat orientated character, the weapon skillswill be of great importance.  Don’t forget the other skills, however!Speech is critical, as is Science.  Sneak will help when you can’t over-come the odds.
Use the Save Game feature
Hmmm, we mentioned this before, didn’t we?
Avoid the Crazy Chicken
You probably realize that you can interrupt your character in
mid-step by simply clicking the left mouse button with the hex cur-sor in a new spot. This will make your character immediately movetowards the new location.  Now, if you repeatedly interrupt yourcharacter during a walk, you will do something very similar to theCrazy Chicken.  It is childish.  Don’t do it.  We beg you.
And Last but not Least...
If you are really stumped, visit the Fallout Shelter at: 
www.interplay.com/fallout
You can also play the game with a friend, or use other means of
communication to find out what your fellow Vault Dwellers are up to!VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—3A

APPENDIX 2: CREDITSVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—4PRODUCTION
Producer ..............................................................Tim Cain
Assistant Producer ......................................Fred Hatch
Division Director ............................Feargus Urquhart
Asst. Division Director ......................Jeremy Barnes
Original Producer ......................................Tom Decker
Production Assistant ..........................Jason G. Suinn
Monkey Boy ................................Mike "Paco" Greene
Mac Assistance ..........................................Chris Benson
ART
Art Director ....................................Leonard Boyarsky
Lead Artists ..........................................Jason Anderson
Leonard Boyarsky
Gary Platner
Artists ..........................................................Robert Collier
Michael Dean
Tramell Ray Isaac
Eddie Rainwater
Scott Rodenhizer
Sharon Shellman
Additional Art By ......................................Peter Kroko
Justin Sweet
Joseph Cesario
Cheryl Austin
Jay Esparza (Tachyon)
Geoff Gregor
Arlene Sommers
George Almond
Erik Jamison
Helena Wickberg
James Doyle (Apples Animation)
Clay Modeller ..................................Scott Rodenhizer
Conceptual Artist ....................................Tony Postma
DESIGN
Lead Designer ............................................Chris Taylor
Designers ..................................................David Hendee
Scott Bennie
Brian Freyermuth
Scott Campbell
Technical Designer ....................................Scott Everts
Additional Design By ............Robert Hertenstein 2
Jess Heinig
Nick Kesting
Design/Dialogue ..................................Mark O'Green
Original Game Design By ............................Tim Cain
Leonard Boyarsky
Jason Anderson
Chris Taylor
Jason Taylor
Scott CampbellPROGRAMMING
Lead Programmers ..........................................Tim Cain
Chris Jones
Programmers ....................................Jesse L. Reynolds
Kevin Weatherman
Nick Kesting
Robert Hertenstein 2
Jess Heinig
Jason Taylor
Mac Programmer ............................................Tim Hume
Additional Programming By ..........Mark Harrison
(Lizard Byte)
John Price
Chris DeSalvo
Mark Murakami
Movie Technology ..................................Paul Edelstein
QUALITY ASSURANCE
Director of Quality Assurance ............Chad Allison
Assistant Director of QA ......................Colin Totman
PC Version Lead Testers ..........................Ron Hodge
Greg "Moose" Baumeister
PC Version Testers ........................Shanna SanPaolo
Evan Chantland
Ed Hyland
Steve Reed
James Chung
Kaycee Vardaman
Bill Field
Richard Barker
Rene Hakiki
Erick Lujan
Matt Kaupa
Steve Victory
Scot Humphreys
Tim Anderson
Darrell Jones
Mac Version Lead Testers ..........................Jim Dodds
Matt Murakami
Steve McLafferty
Mac Version Testers ............................Adam Chaney
Dennis Presnell
Savina Greene
Kaycee Vardaman
Scot Humphreys
Mike Krueger
Matt Golembiewski
I.S. Technicians ....................................................Bill Delk
Steve Cabiness
Director of Compatibility ..............Phuong Nguyen
Compatibility Technicians ....................Marc Duran
Dan Forsyth
Derek Gibbs
Aaron Olalz
John Parker

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—5AUDIO
Audio Director ....................................Charles Deenen
Audio Mastering ......................................Craig Duman
Background TV music ......................Ronald Valdez
Cinematics Re-recording Mixer ..........Dave West
Cinematics Soundeffects ............West Productions
Foley Artists ................................................Doug Turner
Gary Murello
Larry Peacock
Foley Editor ..........................................Caron Weidner
Foley Mixer ..................................................Debby Ruby
Foley Mixer/Artist ..................................Cecilia Perna
Foley Recorded at ..........................West Productions
Foley Supervision ..............................Charles Deenen
Larry Peacock
FX Editor ..........................................Michael Dickeson
Music By ............................................Mark Morgan for
Four Bars Entertainment
Intro Re-Recording Mixer ............Charles Deenen
Music Supervisor ....................................Brian Luzietti
Sound FX Librarians ......................Doug Rappaport
Sergio Bustamante II
Ron Valdez
Sound FX Designers ........................Charles Deenen
Gregory Allen
Larry Peacock
EFX
Weddington
Caron Weidner
Voice Editors ......................................Doug Rappaport
Sergio Bustamante II
Voice Producer ..............................................Fred Hatch
Voice Recording Engineer ................Paul Hurtubise
Voice Supervisor ....................................Chris Borders
Voice Talent Coordination ................Julie Morgavi
Voice Dialogue Recorded At ..................Hollywood
Recording Services
Hollywood, CA
Voice Direction ..................................Jamie ThomasonFEATURING THE VOICES OF
Harold .......................................................... Charlie Adler
Killian ...................................... Richard Dean Anderson
Loxley ................................................................ Jeff Bennett
Rhombus .................................................... Clancy Brown
Set, Gizmo, The Master ...................... Jim Cummings
Decker .............................................................. Keith David
Harry ................................................................ Brad Garrett
The Lieutenant .................................................... Tony Jay
Jain ............................................................ Tress MacNeille
Overseer .............................................................. Ken Mars
Cabbot ............................................................ Richard Moll
Butch Harris, Narrator ............................ Ron Perlman
Vree ................................................................ CCH Pounder
Nichole .............................................................. Pam Segall
Aradesh ............................................................ Tony Shalub
Laura, The Master ...................................... Kath Soucie
Tandi .............................................................. Cree Summer
Morpheus .................................................. David Warner
Maxson .......................................................... Frank Welker
"Maybe"
Performed by Ink SpotsCourtesy of MCA RecordsBy Arrangement with Universal Music SpecialMarkets, Inc.
MAYBE
Written by Allan Flynn and Frank MaddenUsed by permission of EMI Robbins Catalog Inc.(ASCAP)
MARKETING
PR Manager ............................Genevieve Ostergard
Director of Marketing ..........................Paul Sackman
Marketing Managers ..............................Mike Markin
Craig Owens
Michael Courtney
Associate Marketing Manager ................Tod Mack
Traffic Manager ....................................Steve Spandle
Sections from the High Energy Weapons FAQ by Carey Sublette used with permission.  Some changes
were made to fit the background of Fallout.  All errors are the fault of Interplay.
Thanks to: Scott Everts for contributing above and beyond the call of duty to the Quote File, Brian Eno,
the soda fridge (thanks Gus & Rusty!), the Spirit of Christmas (Go Santa!), Demo the cat, Nicol, Tracy &Korey, Mary & Adam, Lisa (for moral support), Jamal, T-Ray’s Mom, the two Donalds, and Teresa Brooks.
Special thanks to the Fallout webpage bulletin board members for comments, suggestions and bug
reports about the demo.  Your feedback was appreciated!
©1997 Interplay Productions. Fallout and Interplay are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights
reserved. All other trademarks and copyrights are properties of their respective owners.A

APPENDIX 3: CUSTOMER SUPPORT
Thank you for purchasing Fallout. If you are experiencing difficulties with
this title, please take advantage of the following product support. Please notethat all our operators only speak English and that we are unable to givegameplay hints through our Technical Support number.  Our Technical sup-port lines are open between the hours of 10am and 5pm.
Technical Support : + 44 (0)207 551 4266
Fax : + 44 (0)207  551 4267
WorldWide Web : http://www.vie.co.ukAddress : Customer Services Department
Virgin Interactive Entertainment Europe Ltd.74a Charlotte StreetLondonW1P 1LRVDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—6

APPENDIX 4: LIMITED WARRANTY
In the unlikely event of a software fault please return the complete package, with
your receipt, to the original place of purchase. Interplay disclaims all responsibilityfor incidental or consequential damages. These statements do not affect your statu-tory rights.
If you do telephone, please be sitting in front of your computer (if possible) and be
sure to provide us with as much information as possible. Make sure to note theexact type of hardware that you are using in your system, including: • Speed and Manufacturer of your Processor.• Make & Model of your Sound Card and Video Card.• Make & Model of your CD-ROM drive.• Amount of RAM present.• Any additional Hardware and Peripherals.• Information contained in your Config.Sys & Autoexec.Bat files.
Note: If you have any problems in obtaining any System Information please consult
your System supplier. It is extremely important that you have the informationabove at hand when you call.When contacting us by post, ensure you include the Title & Version of the game, adetailed description of the problem you are experiencing and the exact type of hard-ware that you are using.When sending us a fax, please remember to leave your fax machine switched onand ready to receive. If you are using a Telephone/Fax system please make surethat the Fax connection is enabled. Ensure to include your name, a return Faxnumber with the area code and a Voice number so we can contact you if we experi-ence problems when trying to Fax you back.
NOTICE
Interplay reserves the right to make modifications or improvements to the productdescribed in this manual at any time and without notice.
COPYING PROHIBITED
This software product and the manual are copyrighted and all rights are reservedby Interplay Productions and are protected by the copyright laws that pertain tocomputer software. You may not copy the software except that you may make a sin-gle copy for backup purposes only. You may not loan, sell, rent, lease, give, sub-license, or otherwise transfer the software (or any copy) unless expressly permittedto do so by Interplay Productions Ltd. You may not modify, adapt, translate, createderivative works, decompile, disassemble, or otherwise reverse engineer or derivesource code from, all or any portion of the software or anything incorporated thereinor permit any third party to do so.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—7A

APPENDIX 5: INTERPLAY’S WORLD WIDE WEB SITE
Welcome to the Interplay Web! As a company dedicated to providing innovative,
high-quality interactive entertainment software, we are always striving to stay asclose as possible to the leading edge of technology. This Web site is the latest exampleof our ongoing effort to provide a wealth of information and opportunities to you. 
As a company of fanatic gamers, we love the idea of gamers all over the world
tapping into cyberspace to see, touch and feel our latest games. 
No hype, no marketing campaign; just great games. To make it work, our goal
is to keep this site fresh and new, to make it a place  where you can tell US what youlike about our games... and what you don’t like about them. So use the feedbackoptions on these pages and sound off. 
Enjoy your visit in our Web site, explore all the different areas we have to offer,
and come back soon. Check us out in the weeks and months ahead; we will be intro-ducing new and exciting areas for you to experience. 
Once again, Welcome!
Brian Fargo
VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—8
HOW TO GET THERE
Interplay’s World Wide Web site is an Internet
service designed to give you the latest informationabout Interplay and our products.The site features our demos, upgrades, productinformation and ordering information. From yourInternet account, point your favourite browser to:
http://www.interplay.com

APPENDIX 6: SURVIVAL RECIPES
Mushroom Clouds
(preheat oven to 200 degrees Fahrenheit)
3-4 egg whites (at room temperature) cocoa
1/4 tsp cream of tartar 8 oz dark chocolate 1 cup superfine sugar* (bittersweet or semi-sweet)
Beat the eggs and tartar with an electric mixer
until soft peaks form. Add the sugar a little at a timewhile continuing to beat, until all the sugar is in andthe mixture is glossy and stiff.
Using a piping bag with a no. 8 tip, pipe out an
equal number of caps and stems onto an ungreasednon-stick cookie sheet. The caps should be about thediameter of a quarter, and the stems should be aboutan inch high and the diameter of a soda straw.
Sprinkle cocoa over the caps and stems, and then
blow on them to spread out the cocoa more evenly. Youmay want to do this outside, as cocoa goes everywhere.
Bake for 2 hours at 200 degrees.Carefully remove the caps and stems from the
cookie sheet. With a dull knife, snip the top of eachstem so it has a flat top surface.
Melt the chocolate (in a double boiler or
microwave). Spread the chocolate on the base of each cap with a butter knife or spat-ula, and use it to glue a stem in place. Put the assembled mushrooms in the refriger-ator for 20 minutes to harden the chocolate, then put them in an airtight container.
Makes 3-4 dozen.
Desert Salad
(Increase or reduce ingredient portions to taste)
1 lb. extra lean ground beef 6 oz. tortilla chips
(turkey may be substituted) 1 firm tomato
1/2 head of iceberg lettuce, cut 1 16oz. bottle of Catalina3 oz. pinto beans dressing6 oz. sliced olives 1 avocado (optional)4 oz. cheddar cheese
Brown the meat, drain.
In large bowl, mix lettuce, beans, and olives. Crush chips and add. Cut tomato into
small chunks and add to bowl. Shred cheese and add. Slice avocado and add. Addmeat. Toss with dressing. Serve.
Makes 4-6 portions.
*superfine sugar is NOT confectioner's sugar or 10X sugar. If you cannot find superfine sugar, it's easy to
make. Just put granulated sugar in a blender or food processor, and blend for 1 minute.VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—9
A

VDSG  –  RESTRICTED  –  VTB-OO1-13
RESTRICTED A—10
C
I
P
Z
O
 Esc
BCharacter Screen
Inventory
PIPBoy 2000 Main ScreenPIPBoy Clock
Options
Toggle Active Items
M
N
S
1
2
3Toggle Mouse Mode
Toggle Active Item Mode
SkilldexUse Sneak Skill
Use Lockpick Skill
Use Steal Skill
4
5
6
7
8
?Use Traps Skill
Use First Aid Skill
Use Doctor SkillUse Science Skill
Use Repair Skill
Show Date and Time
<
>
Space Key
Enter
TabRotate Counterclockwise
Rotate Clockwise
Combat: End TurnCombat: End Combat
Non Combat: DONE
Automap
HomeCenter Screen on PCor
-or-
-
+
F1
F2
F3
F4Decrease Brightness
Increase Brightness
HelpMaster Volume Down
Master Volume Up
Save Game
F5Load Game
F6
F7
F10
F12Quick Save
Quick Load
Exit to Main Menu
Save Screenshot
Pause or
Ctrl
 S+
or
Ctrl
 L+or
Ctrl
 X+APPENDIX 7: QUICK KEYS
Pause
Ctrl
 P+